     YOUR SIMPLE STEP-BY-STEP GUIDE TO
RAISING AND TRAINING A HAPPY PUPPY




‘So easy to follow and
    it really works!’
   LORRAINE KELLY


                    STEVE MANN
      Founder of the Institute of Modern Dog Trainers
                              led
                   'id
                 all     oa
J          a                   Aree


     f
      »
    i iM
           A
           : H
       Digitized by the Internet Archive
           in 2022 with funding from
            Kahle/Austin Foundation




https://archive.org/details/ison_9781788701600
     YOUR SIMPLE STEP-BY-STEP GUIDE TO
RAISING AND TRAINING A HAPPY PUPPY



      cody Peasy
        PU pPY
        $qUwrg
         STEVE MANN
             & Martin Roach




                bringing
                    you closer
                     Published by Blink Publishing
                            2.25, The Plaza,
                            535 Kings Road,
                           Chelsea Harbour,
                          London,   SW 10 O0SZ

                      www.blinkpublishing.co.uk

                     facebook.com/blinkpublishing
                      twitter.com/blinkpublishing

                 Trade paperback - 978-1-788-701-60-0
                      Ebook - 978-1-788-701-61-7

All rights reserved. No part of the publication may be reproduced, stored
   in a retrieval system, transmitted or circulated in any form or by any
  means, electronic, mechanical, photocopying, recording or otherwise,
            without prior permission in writing of the publisher.

   A CIP catalogue of this book is available from the British Library.

                      Typeset by Envy Design Ltd
                    All illustrations © Shutterstock
    Printed and bound in Great Britain by Clays Ltd, Elcograf S.p.A.

                            5791086

            Copyright © Steve Mann & Martin Roach, 2019

    Steve Mann & Martin Roach have asserted their moral right to be
identified as the authors of this Work in accordance with the Copyright,
                      Designs and Patents Act 1988.

                                        MIX
                                      ‘aper fro!


                             ESC Fsc- 0018072
  Every reasonable effort has been made to trace copyright holders of
  material reproduced in this book, but if any have been inadvertently
      overlooked the publishers would be glad to hear from them.

          Blink Publishing is an imprint of Bonnier Books UK
                        www.bonnierbooks.co.uk
To Gina, Luke and all who
  work with rescue dogs
                                                                                                                                             C       i        _




                                                                                                                                             v
                                                                                                                                                                    é&



                                                                                                                                    —            ‘                         d
                                                                                                                                                                         =
                                                                                                                    PT     a         =                                                                                                          ;


                                                                                                                i    i     8
                                                                                                  ;
                                                                                                                     ad
                                                                                              ‘                                                                                                                                        4
                                                                                        A         ag                                     te

                                                                                                                                         a                                                                                                 :    :

                                                                                                           rd             =                                                                  a                                             ay
                                                                                                                     ‘                                              J                                           —                          :
                                                                                            bay
                                                                            Wie             J              GAR           week:                   uit                =                                           .                  7


                                                                                 ee                                      ee                          ee



                                                                                 G>.%                                                                    we         te                   2                 Se)
                          aa   |                            -       —~
                                    ut                                 ——         oe                                ge               >               Ki             eo         Gad                   5                        a
                                   ot                                   ee                                                      4    ———                                       '     .       aye?                   wm         ¥

    -                                                                                                                               THe              ~l Sr oie                           2                               ie
                               i                                                                           ts                                                 ot;              -                                    a         xs
7           -         or
-_                    =                                                                                                                                                                          a                      _—
-                   Paes           ashe iP                  ul                    Oa ae                                                              ee           (an FPS                                yoay            cam
-               ;         st         *          7               Tos                                    .                                                                 oie                                    ‘

ce                             7            7       i           6            ;          Ate                              Wee"       wen                  Ver                                     -~t       i
        ,                                   :
7               Ets                     7               ;       ~*~.        il <tan &‘eis                                       Spoeteh                       ahi                                    a
                      ae                    aa                  HA     Sw aslab wt                Pehd Aioum, vr Ae                                           La. Soe wv                          gts:

                                        ra                                                                                                               re,
             CONTENTS



ABOUT THE AUTHOR                      |
A QUICK GUIDE                         %.
INTRODUCTION: MY BACKSTORY


CHAPTER 1:   MY TRAINING PHILOSOPHY   13
CHAPTER 2: SO, YOU’RE GETTING
             A PUPPY?!                25
CHAPTER 3: 20 & 2 THINGS YOUR PUPPY
           WANTS YOU TO KNOW          45
CHAPTER 4: TOILET TRAINING            5]
CHAPTER 5: BODY LANGUAGE              65
CHAPTER 6: SIT                        8]
CHAPTER 7: MOUTH MANNERS              97
CHAPTER 8: SOCIALISATION               M1
CHAPTER 9: DOG PARK ETIQUETTE          Fe)
CHAPTER 10: PLAY-AWAY                  143
CHAPTER 11: JUMPING UP                 153
CHAPTER 12: REFLEX TO NAME (RTN)       167
CHAPTER 13: EYE CONTACT                i753
CHAPTER 14: LOOSE LEAD WALKING         185
CHAPTER 15: RECALL                     197
CHAPTER 16: NOSE TARGET                209
CHAPTER 17: THE TROUBLE WITH
           LEAVE,                      213
CHAPTER 18: THE RUCKSACK WALK          nae
CHAPTER 19: PUPPY SCHOOL, GROUP
            CLASSES AND VETS, OH MY!   247

GOODBYE, AND GOOD LUCK                 200
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                       Fad)
INDEX                                  Zoe
           ABOUT THE
            AUTHOR




   N 30 YEARS as a professional dog trainer, Steve
     Mann has worked with over 100,000 dogs in many
diverse and varied environments - in the security and
detection field, for the TV and film industries, as a
higher education lecturer on Animal Behaviour and
Husbandry, as well as with a number of international
sports stars and high-profile celebrity dog owners. He has
made many television appearances as a dog behaviour
expert, including as the winning trainer on BBC’s The
Underdog Show. Steve is the founder of the Institute of
Modern Dog Trainers, the leading body for trainers and
behaviourists worldwide.
  With a passion for ethical and science-based dog
training, Steve has taught throughout Europe, South

                                                         1
America, Africa and the Middle East to lead the way
in modern, positive dog training. Steve’s approach is
based in sound behavioural research as opposed to dog
training ‘myths’ and hearsay.
  Steve is also a passionate champion and supporter
of dogs in rescue: ‘If we get it right with our puppies
and educate society as to how to live “right” with our
canines, then my dream of no dogs in rescue centres
may just become a reality.’
  Steve lives in Hertfordshire with his wife Gina, son
Luke and seven (yes, seven!) dogs: Nancy - chihuahua
mix; Pablo - Staffordshire bull terrier; Ash - German
shepherd; Pele - greyhound; Spider - whippet; Summer
- lurcher; Carlos Fandangos of the West - Malinois.
      A QUICK GUIDE


If you’re struggling for time and just need the puppy
training shortcuts ... skip to page 49.
                       rot:   thm   Af              a       .F 1   an   Pe)

                       Le.    Oe    wiinlink            Che PePern eS
                 s    DAH                }        sn,   jpegs)      f? Le:


                                                                        eer

                                                  SC       aes Seprericl




                 De     Ale                  ay   etme     Se      artnet’    aa
Nie   oy

erie       Sie        gravha iis         : Sei          “Wes       rug:       oY




ney    ice Si
               LNGRODUCTION

       MY BACKSTORY


a HEY USED TO call me ‘the freaky dog boy’. | grew
     up in Waltham     Abbey   in Essex in the 1970s and
1980s; then there were      always a couple of dogs out
playing with the kids in the street and | just loved ‘em!
That's how it was   back then. Dogs were just out and
about, doing their thing. Yet, at home we never had a
dog. My mum     tried to fob me off with, ‘How about a
rabbit, Stephen?’ to which |’d reply, ‘Well, no, it ain’t a
dog, Mum, is it?!! So, we   never had a dog and rightly
so, because my parents worked hard and while it was
a lovely idea for a kid growing up, it wasn’t the right
thing to do.
  My family are all Irish, so we would go to Ireland in the
summer holidays and over there it seemed standard that

                                                          5
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
everyone had dogs. I can still remember that magical,
summer holiday feeling, travelling to Ireland all excited,
then seeing and being around loads of dogs when we
got there... which made it all the more frustrating that
we never had a dog when we got back home. Not being
able to have one just magnified my obsession with them
because they felt a lot more precious. So, I played with
the dogs in the streets by my house to get my fix. Pretty
quickly I was just obsessively into dogs.
  Then, one day I found out there was a dog training
class nearby, so I went along and just sat at the back,
watching the trainers and the owners, but mostly the
dogs. Over time I started taking neighbours’ dogs to the
training class. Sometimes I’d even take a dog off the
street and go to the class with them. If there weren’t any
dogs around to take with me, I'd still go without a dog.
The freaky dog boy, sitting at the back.
   I soon started helping the trainers tidy up at the end
of class, then I began to set everything up with them at
the start of the lesson. I’d be making the tea, putting up
the jumps, getting out the toys, then I’d go and do the
same at another dog school, then another school and so
on. I became a dog training groupie.
  Perhaps, inevitably, the trainers began asking me to
help in the class itself. Maybe watching a certain dog
who needed a little reassurance or whatever. I got under
the wing of a few these of trainers and they tried showing

6
                                   MY BACKSTORY      oe,

me how to train dogs. The universal philosophy was
pretty much, “Dog does something good, you give them
something good, namely a pat on the head; dog does
something bad, you give them something bad’, which
meant you pulled on the lead or shouted at them or
even, bizarrely, threw water at them. And, yes, some of
the trainers and owners would hit the dogs.
  That’s when it got serious for me.
  I was only twelve or thirteen at this point, but I felt
very uncomfortable with some of the training that was
going on. Back then, the methodology was pretty old
school: at best strict, at worst very harsh. It was heavy
handed, it was physical. There was widespread use of
punishment. That’s how it used to be, but I just didn’t
agree. There was a real emphasis on corrections - on
punishing a dog - and a strict focus on how to stop
the dog doing something. I would sit there and watch
while shuffling uncomfortably in my seat, thinking,
Why don’t we just focus on what we do want, rather than
only looking for the ‘bad’? The more I was seeing and
learning, the more I was thinking, This training ain’t
actually very good.
   That’s the stuff that would keep me awake at night
because I couldn’t understand or agree with so much of
it. Subconsciously I began to read dogs’ body language
(which was never even mentioned at any of these classes)
and how the dogs exhibited their feelings and what sort

                                                        iv
al EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
of relationships they had with their owners. Behind the
very rigid classes, I started seeing the scabby bits: the
dog getting a bit stressed but no one noticing, the dog
that was scared because of the punishments, the puppy
that was struggling for breath every time their owner
yanked their lead as discipline and, crucially, I’d notice
the owners who were getting stressed, too.
   Looking back, that approach was pretty grotty, but
it was across the board. Everyone seemed to do it
like that.
   But they were wrong. I know now that they were
wrong.



Those early years were a time of great contrast for me. I
was troubled by what I was seeing but also very excited
by the idea of training dogs as a job. The problem was, it
wasn't a job back then. These dog training classes were
run by parttimers on an evening. Back in those days,
a lot of the trainers were from a military background
or had had a career in the Services; they weren’t being
nasty or harsh on purpose, it was just the environment
they were in. To be fair, the people that ran dog training
clubs were hobbyists, enthusiasts, mostly people doing
it out of the kindness of their own hearts and, for some,
on that Thursday night they were the king or queen of
the village hall. Some were volunteers, some may have

8
                                    MY BACKSTORY        Oe,

covered their expenses, but none of them were full-time,
earning-a-living dog trainers.
   Perhaps inevitably, I started doing my own little bits of
training, at first just one-on-one with neighbours’ dogs,
mostly in the street or a garden. Neighbours had maybe
seen me in class and noticed how passionate I was, and
so it was a natural progression really. I didn’t sit down
and figure out my own philosophy of how to train and
(more importantly) treat dogs; I just did what I felt was
natural. Why would I ever want to hurt my friend? Over
time people started coming to me for advice and asking
for my help with a certain problem their dog was having,
and that’s how it evolved. Over the course of my mid-to-
late teens, it just organically grew. There was no grand
career path, I just wanted to be around dogs and, if I
was lucky, they wanted to be around me too.
  As well as no dog, we never had a phone in our house
either (I know, I know, I can almost hear you playing your
violins for me!), so on a Friday night I used to have to go
down a couple of blocks and ring my football manager
from the phone box to find out where to meet for the
game that weekend. On the way, I'd often see one of the
local dogs, a fairly big crossbreed called Yorkie. I always
said, ‘Hi’ to Yorkie, he was a cracking dog; however, on
this one particular night, I saw Yorkie over by a hedge
so I went to say hello to him... And he just done me,
he flew at me and bit me deeply in several places all

                                                          9
Ie    EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

over my body and hurt me really quite badly. Luckily, I
got myself into the phone box - back in the day when
they had a door on them, thank God - and I was able
to wait till he calmed down and went off. I managed to
get home and was taken straight to hospital, so it was
a bad incident.
  Then I found out that Yorkie had been put down. |
was devastated. I felt so awful.
  I couldn’t understand why he had gone for me that
time when at all the hundreds of other meetings we’d
had a good play and got on great. As a professional dog
trainer, | now know that he was doing what is called
‘resource guarding’, namely he had found a discarded
sandwich in the hedge, he perceived me as a threat to
that source of food and his survival instinct told him
to protect that meal. Makes perfect sense now, but at
the time I was just gutted, and it made me even more
determined to learn why and how dogs behaved a certain
way, how I could be involved in that and how I could
stop incidents like the one with Yorkie happening again.
  My obsession with dogs just grew and grew. I had a
few of what my mum would call ‘proper jobs’, but I was
always training dogs in my every spare minute. By then,
of course, I was pretty experienced, so at the age of 21, I
decided it was all-ornothing - go for it, be a dog trainer!
Bear with me here - remember I was the ‘Freaky Dog
Boy’. Me deciding to become a dog trainer is the same

10
                                     MY BACKSTORY

as a ‘normal’ person deciding to become an astronaut,
rock star or superhero! I set up some classes and they
went well; then I set up some more and before I knew
it Iwas lucky enough to have a flourishing dog training
business. It grew pretty rapidly and soon I was asked
to help with rescue centres, security dogs, detection
dogs and, of course, puppies. I started lecturing on
Animal Husbandry and Behaviour at the local Further
Education college. I assisted with cruelty problems both
here and overseas. I never just wanted to teach these
dogs how to do ‘x, y and z, I also wanted to teach
the owners to understand the training from the dog’s
perspective. That led me to study the science of animal
behaviour, learning theories, and to dig much deeper
into the entire psychology of the subject.
  As I write this book, my dog training business - the
Institute of Modern Dog Trainers - is a fully accredited
and registered learning centre providing education and
support for dog trainers and behaviourists. We welcome
over   4,000   attendees   to our   courses   and   seminars
each year; we lecture on dog behaviour all over the
world; and have a global army of accredited trainers
and behaviourists to help me ‘fight the good fight’, to
promote positive, ethical and science-based dog training
to the public. I’m proud to say it is one of the biggest
and most successful bodies of its kind in the world.
  Consequently, over the years, since kicking about in

                                                           11
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

the street with those local dogs, I’ve been involved in
the training of tens of thousands of puppies. Along
the way, I have evolved my own approach in regard
to puppies, and in this book I will try to pass that on
to you. Hopefully, some of my knowledge will prove
useful as you embark on a journey with your own new
family member (and they are a new family member,
make no mistake about that). Hopefully this book
will teach you how to train your wonderful puppy,
but most of all, I hope it will show you how to have a
lasting, fulfilling and mutually rewarding relationship
for many years to come.
  But hey, what do I know... I’m just the freaky dog
boy, right?




iz
                         CPP       ae      RL

             MY TRAINING
             PHILOSOPHY


    ‘Nothing taught by force stays in the soul:
                         - PLUTO   PLATO


S°        here's   the   part   where   | tell you     about   my
        training philosophy. | guess     | always     look at life
from the dog's perspective. If | were your puppy, how
would     | want    to be trained?      I'd want     to feel safe
valued and loved. I'd want to feel pure happiness when
| see you.
  As I said in the Introduction, dog training for me
has never been a hobby, more a 24/7 obsession. I
think it’s an absolute obligation of all owners to show
puppy how to live safely and happily with us through
positive training. Training is not about fancy tricks to

                                                                13
RY easy PEASY PUPPY SOQUEEZY
impress our friends; it’s a way to enhance everyone’s
life. Having a dog in your family is a real honour, and
doing positive dog training is the honourable thing.
Your puppy is a family member and it’s a big investment
- I’m not talking about the money, but the emotional
investment: a puppy will dictate the clothes that you
wear, the car that you drive, your next house, your
holidays, your furniture. They’re a massive, massive
influence on your life.
   For training the behaviours you want, I’m going to
show you the very best way to teach puppy so they stay
super-keen to learn and get it right. For the cheeky
pup behaviours we’ll want less of, such as nipping and
chewing, I’m going to teach you the methods to get
puppy back on track without the use of fear or you
having your ear bent by the local pseudo-expert down
the park who mistakenly tells you that your puppy
is trying to be ‘dominant’ over you. Yes, I have a big
emphasis on ethical and science-based training, but on
the primary level, it’s crucial to understand that we
are not training rats in a box or mice in a laboratory.
The training has to go hand in hand with empathy and
your relationship with your dog, with an emphasis on
how the dog feels.
   There are really only ever going to be two reasons why
your puppy won’t do what you've asked:


14
                        MY TRAINING PHILOSOPHY
  1. They don’t understand what you’ve asked
      them to do.
  2. They’re not motivated enough to do it.


It really is that simple, nothing to do with wolves, pack
leaders or bullying. Don’t fall for silly breed characteristics
such as ‘stubborn’. No dog is ever stubborn - that’s
a foolish concept driven by our ego and pride. Think
about it: as if a dog will say, ‘I know what you want me
to do, I’m motivated for what I may get for completing
the behaviour but do you know what? ... ISHAN’T!’
  Never in a million years.
  The great news is, with my training philosophy
everything we teach is rooted in behavioural science.
We don’t have to summon up mystical ‘energies’ or
leaky hierarchy theories. We can have a great time puppy
training and apply hang-your-hat-on evidence-based
learning theory. You can roll on the floor to play with
puppy and ‘get your geek on’ at the same time!
  And remember: it’s your responsibility. Your puppy,
your responsibility.
  A final point here about timings. People often ask me
how long and how many times a day or week they should
be doing the training. There are two answers: specific
exercises where you and puppy work on something one
to one, then little and often is perfect. A few minutes

                                                             15
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SOQUEEZY
here and a few minutes there are far more profitable
than turning into a war of attrition! However, also be
aware of all those other hundreds of minutes in the
day when they are still learning. The few minutes here
and there are very constructive, but there are so many
opportunities to work on training as each new puppy
day unfolds.


     A WORD ABOUT PUNISHMENT
No one is surprised or disappointed when a goldfish
swims or when a hamster runs on its wheel. No one
rushes to the Internet to google how to stop their rabbit
from chewing or their pony from pooping in the stable.
No sane parent feels the need to fight their baby for
exploring toys with their mouth or putting nappies to
good use!
  We know what a puppy is, and what a puppy does.
  It’s no secret. We've been rubbing shoulders with
them for tens of thousands of years. If you don’t want
something that walks like a duck, looks like a duck,
sounds like a duck and does all of the natural behaviours
a healthy duck does, then don’t get a duck!
  Same with puppies.
  Puppies wee. They vocalise when they’re excited and
they cry when they’re lonely. They chew for pain relief
and they chew when there’s nothing better on offer

16
                       MY TRAINING PHILOSOPHY
for them to do. They love greeting new people so
sometimes being social and saying ‘Hi’ is more important
than anything else in the world! What a wonderful way
to be!
  Puppies grow up to be dogs. And that love of
communicating, sniffing, licking and chewing never
goes away. Nor should it. After all, it’s what makes dogs
so special, so let’s swim with the tide rather than fight
against the current.
  Our responsibility is not to say ‘No’ to puppy, but to
guide them so they know:

  “ What to chew

  ty How to say ‘Hi’

  % Where to wee

     When to get excited


Our responsibility is to teach them what we do want,
not to spiral into the murky realm of punishing what
we don’t want.
  Punishment works ... of a fashion ... for a while ...
in certain contexts. It’s also mean and, if employed, its
potency will deteriorate, along with your relationship.
  Let me give you an example. A few years back I was
‘flashed’ by a policeman with his trusty speed gun going
48mph in a 4Omph zone at 8am. I know, right? Lewis
                                                       bf
     _ EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

Hamilton over here! I duly received a letter in the post a
few days later giving me the option of two punishments:
a £90 fine and points on my licence or the chance to
attend a three-hour speed awareness course. I opted for
the latter as my chosen poison.
  As ‘three-hours-stuck-in-a-room-with-twenty-
other-adults-that-also-don’t-want-to-be-there-so-they-
regress-back-to-tutting-school-kids-swinging-in-their-
chairs’ go, it was okay. In fact, as a punishment, it had
the usual effect.
  The      American      psychologist   and   behaviourist
B.F. Skinner would say that the characteristic of a
punishment is that when it’s delivered to the ‘culprit’
as a consequence to a particular behaviour, it makes
that particular behaviour less likely to occur again in
the future.
  Tie:
   I did keep my eye on my speedometer for the next week
or so to ensure | didn’t speed.
  Then, dear Reader, I lapsed.
  The punishment wore off.
  Admittedly, I was particularly vigilant when driving
at the specific time of 8am in the specific area | was
initially flashed. I developed a habit of looking out
for traffic cops: if I saw one I slowed down, if I didn’t,
I didn’t.
   I had linked the punishment to a particular context,

18
                      MY TRAINING PHILOSOPHY
a particular location and a particular person: PC Plod.
Away from that particular context, location or person
I'd learned I was ‘safe’. Eventually the punishment had
no effect on my behaviour other than a visceral dread in
my gut when I saw the police.
  Imagine now the puppy on the receiving end of a
‘punishment’ for jumping up at the milkman -one
morning. What may they ‘learn’ from that event?

  1. Potential lesson: bad stuff happens when people
     come to the door.
     Potential fallout: ‘bark’ at visitors if they
     approach the door.

  2. Potential lesson: bad stuff happens when
     approached by men.
     Potential fallout: be wary of men.

  3. Potential lesson: bad stuff happens if I jump up
     when Mum/Dad are here.
     Potential fallout: it’s okay to jump up at people
     when I’m out of reach of Mum/Dad.


On top of all that, when focused on using grotty
punishments as a teaching aid, the punishment is only
delivered when puppy gets it wrong. Imagine all the
opportunities you could have had if you were focused
on delivering a reward every time puppy did get it right?!

                                                         19
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
Puppies learn the same way as we do. If we carry out a
behaviour a particular way and that behaviour triggers
a consequence that we enjoy and want more of, we’re
more likely to do that behaviour again in the future.
This book is all about delivering positive reinforcement
(aka giving something puppy loves) in exchange for the
puppy behaviours we want more of.
   In writing and researching this book, I read a lot of
articles and watched many videos with titles such as,
How to Punish Your Puppy. I’ve not seen any entitled How
to Punish Your Senile Dog or Geriatric Dogs That Test Your
Leadership and Boundaries.
   If you think it’s wrong to shout at, poke, tap, kick or
hit (for that’s what it is, folks) an old dog, then it’s also
wrong to do the same to a baby dog.
  There are still a lot of trainers and clubs where the
attitude is, “Well, this is how we have always done
it, so this is how we will always do it.’ There is no
evolution there, but the science and understanding of
these fantastic animals is expanding all the time and
so is my training; it’s a constant process of refinement
because that’s what keeps it interesting. So, no, it is not
acceptable to punish a dog in those ways.
   Abraham Lincoln, who admittedly never won Crufts,
said: “Violence begins where knowledge ends’, and in
relation to dog training that is so true. Some people will
say, punishment doesn’t work. Punishment absolutely

20
                      MY TRAINING PHILOSOPHY            q,
does work. Punishment works but it will always come
at a heavy cost - you will lose motivation, you will
lose trust and you will lose your relationship. Even if
punishment works some of the time, is it worth it? If
you end up with a dog that doesn’t trust you or a dog
that doesn’t want to come near you? How can that ever
be a good thing?
  Back to speeding, guess how those clever Dutch
are approaching the problem? They’ve set up a speed
camera that actually adds funds to the community
coffers when a car driving under the speed limit goes by!
How cool is that?! The drivers are positively reinforced
for the correct behaviour,    the unwanted     behaviour
diminishes, drivers love the presence of the camera and
there’s no conflict. What a beautiful and intelligent
solution to combat a problem that punishment itself
has never managed to fix. (By the way, that skit earlier
about me speeding, was purely for illustrative purposes
you understand. I’m a model driver me, hands ten-to-
two, mirror-signal-manoeuvre, red triangle in the boot,
the lot.)
  ‘Yeah but ...’, I hear you say ... what if puppy does do
the unwanted behaviour, surely I can punish them then?
  Read on...




                                                        al
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

      CONTROL AND MANAGEMENT
         IS YOUR BEST FRIEND!
Q: How can you stop your puppy chasing anyone on a bike?
A: Don’t let your puppy ride a bike.

Common sense isn’t as common as we'd like to think
sometimes, but the more common it is when bringing up
a puppy, the happier and safer youll both be. As a trainer
I can often be seen scratching my chin and thoughtfully
sucking a tooth before coming up with the most elegant
of solutions to stop puppy stealing unattended food from
the coffee table. Having first designed a cunning system
of levers, pulleys and mirrors, even I have to concede
that the simple, and therefore the best, solution is don’t
leave food unattended on the coffee table.
  ‘Simplicity is the ultimate sophistication’ - the genius
Leonardo Da Vinci said that, and do you know what -
to this day there are still no reports of LDV’s cockapoo
stealing any of his sandwiches.
  As we progress through this book, we’re going to
discuss how to prevent puppy from doing all the
unwanted behaviours, such as chewing and nipping, as
well as how to encourage them to do all the behaviours
we do want, including walking nicely on the lead and
performing super-fast recalls. You’ll be learning all about
groovy training techniques such as ‘Mutually Exclusive

Ze
                       MY TRAINING PHILOSOPHY
Behaviours’ and ‘Positive Reinforcement’, but one of
the most effective tools you can put into practice straight
away is called “Control and Management’.
  Good, old Control and Management suggests that if
puppy runs upstairs and pees on your bed, put a child-
gate at the bottom of your stairs. If puppy raids your
kitchen bin, then put a child-lock on your cupboard
door, and if puppy chews your shoelaces, then merely
put your shoes away properly out of puppy’s reach.
(Attention! DO NOT WEAR          CROCS, no need to go
THAT far.)
  ‘Ah ha!’ cry the sceptics, ‘but isn’t that just avoiding
the problem?’
  Yes. Yes, it is.
  Why look for problems?
  Why let puppy practise these unwanted behaviours?
Why set up situations for puppy to ‘fail’, just so you can
issue a punishment?
   Control the environment properly so these unwanted
behaviours don’t occur and make sure you offer plenty
of more acceptable outlets for puppy to partake in.
   Many atime at the end of a two-hour puppy home visit
consultation, after I’ve carefully pulled on each intricate
thread of each intricate puppy problem behaviour, |
will draw up a nice, simple, easy-to-follow training plan
with plenty of Control and Management suggestions to
ensure that the owners’ beautiful homes aren’t wrecked

                                                        23
re EASY PEASY PUPP YSOULEZY

by puppies hanging off the curtains, raiding the kitchen
bins and peeing on the carpet.
   The husband (and yes, it’s always the husband!) will
glance through the training plan before casually looking
up and stating, ‘Well, of course, it’s just common sense
really, isn’t it?’
   ‘Yes,’ I say. ‘Just common sense. That'll be £350 please.’
  Then I wink at the puppy, high-five the wife and
cartwheel out of the house!




24
                    Sco       tee

     SO,YOU’RE     |
 GETTING A PUPPY?!

      uick question: you don’t mind, do you, if | pop
      around to yours later to wee on your carpet, bite
your nose, drive you nuts with sleep deprivation        and
raid your bank account?     | promise   I'll only stay for a
dozen years or so. Cool, I'll grab my coat!
  None of us are perfect, but failing to plan is planning
to fail and all that, so get stuck into this book and
together we'll ride the roller coaster of puppy parenthood.
Hold tight!


NEW PUPPY? (EEEEK!) NOW WHAT?! -
    YOUR ESSENTIAL KIT LIST
  Comfort blanket

                                                          25
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
     Den (crate or puppy pen)
     Hot water bottle
     Bowls
 Toys
     Chews
     Food
     Treats
     Poo bags
     Enzymatic cleaner
     Collar
     Dog tag
     Comfortable harness
     Lead

                   Comfort Blanket
This is not just ANY old blanket, oh no!
  This is a nice, soft, comfortable blanket that you’re
going to take to the breeder a good couple of weeks
before you actually bring puppy back home with you.
The idea is that this blanket is left in with the puppy
to absorb all the lovely familiar smells from puppy’s
mum, their littermates and their newborn home
environment.
   Dogs are so governed by their sense of smell (known
as the olfactory system) that if we can transport that
aroma of familiarity and safety back to their new home,
it’s going to help pup feel much more safe and secure,

26
                  SO, YOU’RE GETTING A PUPPY?!       ,

especially on those first few anxious nights. Remember
that first time you were separated from your mum?
Perhaps it was your first day at nursery or school, or
the first big school trip you went on overnight? Now,
imagine that not only were you separated from your
mum, but you were also taken by several members of a
different species who all wanted to touch you, lift you
in the air and show you their teeth (!), then at some
point they put you in an unknown metal time machine
after which you landed in a totally unfamiliar building
crammed full of scary new smells, sounds, sights and
textures. You’d be fairly anxious, I reckon.
  Therefore, the logic of the blanket is that the more
we can splice the old home into the new home by
transferring familiar smells, the better. The comfort
blanket is such a valuable tool to help blend the old
familiar environment into the stark new one. It’s very
similar to a toddler finding comfort by holding onto
their teddy bear during the first day at nursery.

                         Den
Soooo important!
  Having a den available for your pup is one of the most
valuable tools to help keep them safe and, to be honest,
your nerves from shredding! The den is a suitably sized
dog crate or a puppy pen, both readily available from
pet shops or online.

                                                      Al
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
     What a den IS:
 Dd
       A safe and secure place that puppy feels awesome
       about being in.

       A place where great stuff can be discovered, such
        as chews, a comfortable bed, interactive toys,
        their comfort blanket.

       A place puppy can happily go into when 100%
       supervision isn’t available, e.g. the designated
       ‘Watcher’ (see “Toilet Training’ on page 51) is on
       the phone or is busy in another room.

       A place puppy can be in several times throughout
       the day to build ‘alone-time’ confidence, which
       helps prevent future separation issues.

       A place where only positive associations are
        made.

       A tool to employ for accelerated toileting outside.
       ‘Accelerated Toileting’ sounds like a round from
       a Japanese game show! What I mean is, a tool to
       make the process of toilet training as expedient
       as possible.

     What a den is NOT:

     ‘” An area to put puppy in as a punishment or
       time out.

28
                    SO, YOU'RE GETTING A PUPPY?! @R
 % An area to toilet in.

 * An area that may be too hot, too cold or in any
   way uncomfortable.

 % An area that is isolated from the main social ‘hub’
       of the household.

           How to Help Puppy Love Their Den
The den is one of the best bits of kit you can invest
your time and money in, in order to make you and
your puppy’s life as comfortable and stress-free as
possible. To repeat myself - it is definitely not to be
used as a method of punishment or ‘time out’, rather
as a place of comfort and relaxation. Used correctly, a
den will become an invaluable tool to stop unwanted
behaviours occurring when you can’t watch your pup
100% of the time. Therefore, FROM       DAY ONE we
want    to give the den as many   positive associations
as possible.
  If you’re lucky enough to get your puppy from a
decent and caring breeder, you may even be able to drop
your den off to them a couple of weeks before you bring
puppy home, to help condition them to the area. At the
very least, as soon as puppy comes home with you, help
them to discover the wonderful items to be found in
their den.
  When introducing the den, don’t immediately lock

                                                     29
all EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

and retain puppy in it. Leave the door open when
possible, so puppy doesn’t panic about being ‘captured’
or trapped. With each new positive association, puppy
will learn to go and hang out where the good stuff is.
Let puppy make the right choice; for puppies, choice
builds confidence.
   Make the den a place where wonderful things are
to be found, complete with awesome chews, a luxury
bed, amazing toys, a wonderful comfort blanket and,
obviously, a bowl of water.
  Next, you should regularly check to see if the
Den Wizard has visited. You don’t know who the Den
Wizard is? You’re kidding, right?! Well, the Den Wizard
is the most amazing little man that visits when no
one’s watching and hides all his treasure (a horde that,
to be honest, happens to look, smell and taste A LOT
like dog treats!) around puppy’s den. After the Den
Wizard has visited, I like to stand by the entrance of
the den and start to whisper to puppy, ‘Has the Wizard
visited? Oh my, what’s if he’s been ... has he left any
treasure?!’ I then let puppy into the den to explore and
enjoy the wonderful dopamine rush of discovering the
wizard’s gold!
  Author’s note: sometimes, when home alone, I search
my own house to see if the Office Wizard has been. He
never has. I am a 48-year-old man. ®


30
                   SO, YOU'RE GETTING A PUPPY?! @3y,
                  Hot water bottle
Chances are, for every single sleep that puppy has had
to date, they've had the opportunity to curl up next to
the nice, warm, comforting soft body of Mum or their
littermates. Now, obviously you’re not taking home the
whole litter (if you are, you’re reading the wrong book.
I'd recommend Easy Peasy Are You NUTS?!), so let’s try
and simulate that comfort as best we can. At bedtime,
or constantly in the den, have a warm (but not too hot)
water bottle wrapped in their comfort blanket, available
for puppy to snuggle up to in times of need.

                        Bowls
Safe, washable bowls for food and water. Ensure fresh
water is always available for puppy. Consider a non-spill
travel bowl for car trips and maybe a portable dog water
bottle for journeys to the park or training class.

                         Toys
A good variety of toys are an absolute must for puppy
to help with exploration, relationship building (with
you) and teething. I tell my owners that, ‘Puppy has
four hours’ worth of chewing per day, what would you
rather they chew? You, the furniture or an appropriate
toy?!’ The trick isn’t to try and stop them chewing; the
trick is to appreciate they have to chew - it’s natural
and necessary, so therefore your challenge is to divert

                                                       31
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY

that chewing onto the right target: often a toy, such as
a stuffed Kong or rope toy. Whatever you choose, you
should offer a tactile range of textures, such as fluffy or
rubber, a wide variety of shapes and a broad spectrum
of colours.
  Toys are not just for teething - they can be employed
in comforting puppy by cuddling up to them, they can
also be employed for you and pup to play together to
help build that all-important bond and have good old-
fashioned fun sessions together!

                            Chews
Build up a good store and variety of chews. A good
chew can help puppy relax as well as offering a mutually
benefitting alternative to the furniture! Avoid chews
that can splinter or would be potentially dangerous if
ingested.
  Appropriate chews include:

     ’’ Interactive rubber feeding toys, such as Kong

     ‘” Softer textures, such as rope toys

     ‘Harder textures, such as Nylabone

     ‘” Antler horns

     ®” Bull’s pizzles (don’t ask!)



32
                    SO, YOU'RE GETTING A PUPPY?! @R
                           Food
Welcome to the biggest minefield of the canine world!
One time I was speaking at a large international animal
welfare conference in Croatia and during one of the
breaks I spotted two delegates nearly coming to blows
whilst arguing about the virtues of one canine diet
versus another. As each competed to take the nutritional
moral high ground, I couldn’t help but notice both were
drinking coffee and eating doughnuts!
  My approach is the same as it is for feeding myself.
Personally, I’m drawn to food that is as ‘natural’ as
possible, so I feed my dogs a raw diet as opposed to
what I regard as overly processed food. However, this
is a hugely controversial and much-debated topic for
another book, so for now I just want to point out that
much of it is simple common sense: avoid the bad
stuff and make sure puppy gets the right nutrients by
avoiding unhealthy colourings, sugars, additives and
preservatives.
   Puppies generally get fed three to four times a day
initially, so try and use a good percentage of that daily
food constructively, either to give a good association
with the den, to reinforce correct toilet habits (see “Toilet
Training’ on page 51) or to stuff in an interactive feeder
to allow for relaxing and legal (!) chewing.




                                                          33
re     EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

                          Treats
You can never have enough treats!
  We're going to be using treats for several purposes
such as reinforcing the behaviours we love (Sit, Recall, Eye
Contact, etc) as well as to give a nice, positive association
to the things in the world we want puppy to be happy
and confident around (kids, cars, visitors, weird noises,
strange textures, etc).
   Therefore, it is essential that you always have a nice
supply of good treats to hand, such as chicken, cheese,
hot dogs. Of course, we don’t want to be using too
much of anything that may be unhealthy but a little bit
of Oh my days, that was DELICIOUS! is really going to
help puppy remember (and therefore repeat) the great
behaviours they did to get that little bit of ‘awesome’!
   Chances are, you may well be able to use part
of puppy’ normal daily food allowance for such
purposes (even if they are raw fed). For example,
using it constructively in a stuffed Kong to help with
‘settletime’ in their den or with the family in front of
the TV.
   It’s important to use rewards that are enjoyable for
puppy, so as a general rule use the best toys, games and
treats you can lay your hands on. Specifically regarding
treats, try to avoid any that have a high level of sugars,
salts or tons of complicated-sounding additives and
preservatives. The less ingredients the better, so I’m

34
                   SO, YOU’RE GETTING A PUPPY?!

a fan of sliced chicken or ham to get the best results
without compromising motivation or quality of diet.
  We use food a lot in puppy training to reinforce
the behaviour we want more of, and throughout
socialisation to give a positive association    to places
and people. And before anyone complains that I am
encouraging obesity in dogs, I must point out that over
time we gradually fade out the treats as the training
and positive associations become more reliable. Don’t
be mean when training puppy though, none of us want
to work for nothing!

                       Poo Bags
Do your bit for the environment, go for biodegradable
poo bags or nappy sacks. The bad news is, you’ll need
tons of ’em! If puppy isn’t immediately toileting outside,
especially in new places, don’t be alarmed, it’s just a
confidence thing. As they become more relaxed in new
environments, they'll become comfortable and the rest
will flow!

                Enzymatic Cleaner
Life isn’t perfect so there may be the odd occasion when
puppy can’t help but go to the toilet on your carpet! With
this in mind, get yourself a good, pet-friendly enzymatic
cleaning product. ‘Back in the day’ some people used
to recommend vinegar for clearing up puppy urine.

                                                        35
Wf easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
Although vinegar is an alkaline and therefore good for
deodorising soiled areas, it’s since been found that it
can actually encourage some puppies to wee in the areas
it’s been used in!

                           Collar
As soon as possible, get puppy used to wearing a nice,
light collar. Nothing too heavy or thick as this could
prove irritating and stressful for puppy (remember the
first time you were made to wear a ridiculous hat or
uncomfortable shoes as a child!?). As with introducing
all new things to a puppy, go slow and keep it positive:

     1. Sit on the floor with the collar behind your
        back.

     2. Show puppy the collar, give them a treat then
        put the collar back behind your back.

     3. Repeat several times to make the association
        that the presence of the collar = good things.

     4. When you notice that puppy is happy to see the
        collar (what is known in dog training circles as a
        ‘Positive Conditioned Emotional Response’ (see
       page 222) - in normal language: a happy tail,
       wiggly body, expectant eyes - then touch it onto
       puppy’s neck, and give them a treat.


36
                  SO, YOU'RE GETTING A PUPPY?! @q
 5. As step 4, but graduate to gradually placing it
    loosely onto puppy’s neck before treating, then
    removing before repeating.

  6. Fix collar around puppy’s neck, play a game, have
     fun, remove collar, stop the good stuff. Repeat.

  7. Gradually increase the duration puppy is wearing’
     the collar until it becomes a permanent fixture.

                       Dog Tag
In the UK, the Control of Dogs Order 1992 mandates
that any dog in a public place must wear a collar with
the name, address and postcode of the owner engraved
or written on it. Again, introduce the tag on the collar
nice and early. Not too big, remember - they’re a puppy,
not a Beastie Boy!

              Comfortable Harness
I’m a fan of using a harness rather than a collar for
puppy walks. I want you and puppy to enjoy your walk
together and for each of you to be as comfortable as
possible. In my experience, a harness affords a lot
more comfort, control and connection than a collar
around the neck. There will inevitably be times that
the lead goes tight between puppy and you - when that
happens, we want to keep that pressure to a minimum,
so I prefer that tension to be spread comfortably over

                                                         37
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

the pup’s broad chest and shoulders, rather than to
stress the narrow throat area.
   Of course, in this book we’re going to be teaching
puppy to walk nicely on the lead (see page 185); however
that takes training and training takes time. So, for now,
let’s keep puppy comfortable and safe from day one. Get
a comfortable, adjustable harness and fit it well.

                            Lead
Much like the collar introduction, start with a light
lead so puppy is unaware it’s even attached. Once
puppy is happily wearing a harness you can then attach
the lead and at that moment make like a party*: treats,
games and cuddles! Initially, there is no need for you
to hold the lead as long as you’re in a safe area, such
as your house or garden. If you’re lucky, puppy won’t
even notice the lead trailing behind them. If they do
notice, then happy days because pup will make the
association that ‘being on the lead = good times!’

“During my journey I have learned from some great dog
trainers worldwide. When I was younger I worked with an
awesome trainer from Belgium called Geert De Bolster. Now,
Geert’s English wasn’t altogether brilliant, although to be fair
it was certainly much better than my Belganese! As ever, I
didn’t lack enthusiasm when working with the dogs, so Geert
eventually distilled his instructions for me down to just two:

38
                    SO, YOU'RE GETTING A PUPPY?! (aq
  1. ‘Make like a party’ = crazily play and have fun with
     the dog as a reward.

  2. ‘Make like a lamp post’ = shut up and stand still!



      PUPPY PROOFING THE HOUSE
Don’t blame puppy for being nosey!
  Their desire to curiously investigate every square inch
of your home is actually essential for puppy to learn to
feel safe and become acclimatised to their new world as
quickly as possible.
   So, an ounce of precaution is better than a pound of
cure! Below are just a few examples of things to be aware
of before puppy comes home:

 ” Make sure poisonous plants, such as certain
   types of lilies or daffodil bulbs, are not
   accessible in your garden (there are numerous
   resources and forums online to keep you up-to-
   date with the latest lists and advice).

 % Tidy up, remove or protect all types of illegal
     chew toys, such as remote controls, posh shoes
     or mobile phones. If you have not tidied these
     up, removed or protected them, you have hereby
     ordained them legal chew toys. If they are then
     chewed ... it’s your fault, not pup’s!

                                                            39
WY Easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
 te Beware low-hanging table cloths!
     Clear all WMD     (Wags of Mass Destruction)
     targets! A happy puppy tail can wipe out six
     large wine glasses in less than 2.4 seconds!

     Monitored furniture is furniture; unmonitored
     furniture is a legal chew toy!

     Fence off a pond or any accessible water.

     Make sure all chemicals, such as paint, fertiliser
     and weedkiller, are well out of reach.

     Make sure all garden fencing is secure.

     Electricity cables ... the list is potentially endless!
     Make safe anything that you feel could be a
     potential choke hazard. If it’s not safe for your
     puppy to interact with it, get it out of reach. For
     safety’s sake, we don’t leave human babies to
     crawl around the home unsupervised; the same
     should apply to puppies.


Take the list above and have a wander around your
house and garden with a pad and pen. Do yourself a
checklist and make sure you tick each one off to avoid
disaster before puppy arrives. Get it done - when puppy
arrives you'll want to enjoy the process, not constantly
be on the lookout for danger.

40
                   SO, YOU'RE GETTING A PUPPY?! @q

  THE FIRST NIGHT: GOOD LUCK ALL!
Let’s be honest, the first night in a new home is going
to be pretty scary for baby pup. They’ve been ripped
from Mum, their brothers and sisters, and the only
environment they've ever known. Chances are they’ve
then been put in your scary car for the first time and
arrived at a place that is full of new (and therefore
potentially frightening) sights, sounds and smells.
Contrary to common belief, now is not the time for
tough love. Now is a time for empathy and establishing
security and trust.
   If possible, collect puppy in the morning so they have
all day to spend with you and become familiar with their
new environment and new home before night time. The
plan is that puppy (and you!) have a full and positively
eventful day so that by the time bedtime comes around,
you're both ready to ‘hit the sack’! Also, if you collect
puppy nice and early in the morning, you'll have all day
to show them how cool their new den is.
  With this in mind, where do you leave the ‘seasoned’
blanket wrapped around the hot water bottle? In the den.
Where does puppy find all their tasty treats throughout
the day? In the den. Where will puppy ‘discover’ the
most comfortable bedding in the house? In the den.
And where does puppy get to eat breakfast, lunch and
dinner? You guessed it, in the den! Throughout the first

                                                       41
Wf easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
day, do everything you possibly can to illustrate to puppy
that their den is THE place to be.
  When bedtime comes around, bring the now-
familiar den upstairs and set it up next to your bed.
One practical observation: make sure puppy’s final
meal is at least two hours before bedtime so they have
the best opportunity to ‘empty’ when you go out for
the final toilet ceremony.
  This brings us back to the ‘old school’ approach of
leaving puppy alone for the first night. Really? Think
about that - how would you feel if you were pulled as a
toddler from the only home you’ve ever known, taken
from your mother and family, and placed in a strange
environment full of new sounds, smells and sights.
Wouldn’t you need a little extra comfort if possible, to
get you through the trauma?
  Rather than completely isolating puppy from you and
keeping them downstairs to cry while you go upstairs
(which will lead to a pretty grotty night for both of you,
your neighbours, and your neighbours’ neighbours!), |
suggest for the first few nights you have puppy in the
bedroom with you, on the floor in their den. Remember,
our plan here is to build a confident, optimistic puppy,
and to build trust like that takes patience and time.
  Have a few tasty treats and the ‘seasoned’ blanket in
there to comfort puppy and be aware that you may have
to drop your hand in every now and then throughout

42
                   SO, YOU'RE GETTING A PUPPY?! Qa
the night to comfort little ’un. Let’s be honest, you
didn’t get a puppy for a quieter life!
   A huge advantage in having puppy in the room with
you is that you’re available to let them outside when
they start pacing or whining for a wee. This takes great
strength of character on your behalf to haul yourself out
of bed, carry puppy down the stairs and stand out on a
frosty lawn at 3am on a November’s morning but, believe
me, it’s time well spent. You’ve avoided puppy practising
weeing indoors and you've given yourself an opportunity
to reinforce that all-important toileting outside (we will
discuss this massive topic in Chapter 4).
   In the morning, move the Den back downstairs to
its normal position for you and puppy to make use of
throughout the day.

After a few days or even weeks, as pup gets more and
more comfortable in their den and being around their
new family, if desired you can start to place the den
further from you and closer to the final location that
you will eventually want your family dog to be sleeping
in each night.
  Don’t rush it. Remember, trust takes time.



As I write this, I’m sat in the office with Carlos, my
13-year-old Malinois. My soulmate. Sadly, Carlos was

                                                       43
Wf easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
diagnosed last week with a heart condition, so we’re
not going to be together much longer. I’m counting the
minutes; he’s not. He’s still giving off sparks and living
life purely for pleasure, not a care in the world.
   That’s how I’ve taught him to be from the age of seven
weeks.
   That’s how I want your puppy to be. Living life purely
for pleasure, not a care in the world.
   I think back to the magical adventures we’ve shared:
catching ‘bad guys’, searching for drugs, singing along
to the radio in the van on our way to the training field,
and generally just being with each other. We’ve covered
thousands of miles and made more B&B hosts doubt
their own judgement when we've rolled up than I care
to remember.
   I'm so excited for you.
   You and your puppy are going to make your own
magical adventures and I want this book to hold your
hand and guide you so that, in 13 years’ time when you
look back and ask yourself, Was it really worth all the poop-
picking-sleepless-nights-nose-biting-furniture-replacing-change-
your-clothesAGAIN torment? (that you will definitely go
through), your immediate answer will be the same as
mine: ‘I wouldn’t change it for the world.’




44
                   tee     teres

   20&%THINGS    |
YOUR PUPPY WANTS
   YOU TO KNOW
1. ?m born with the potential to be friendly.
   Deliberately grow that potential every day by
   keeping me healthy, safe and optimistic.

2.    1am a walking Behaviour Machine! Control
     my environment so I don’t do the wrong
     behaviours and help me do the ones that pay
     the best!

3. Be my friend.

4. Each time we are with each other, one of us is
     training the other!


                                                    45
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
      ey Neither of us are wolves. Please don’t
         confuse my enthusiasm with a desire for
         world domination. I may want to go on
         furniture because it’s comfy! I may go through
         doorways before you because I move faster
         than you and I’m super-curious! You really
         don’t need to eat before me, life’s too short!


       . Spend time with me.

         Keep it simple.

       . Remove suspicion.


       . We’re teammates, not opposition.

     10. If there is a behaviour that you don’t want me
         to do, please give me a reinforcing alternative
         behaviour to do, then we’ll both be happy.

     ile All of my behaviour happens for a reason.

     LZ: There are only two reasons I won’t do what
         you're asking:
            — | don’t know what you’re asking me to do.
            - I’m not motivated enough to do it.


46
20 & ¥» THINGS YOUR PUPPY WANTS YOU TO KNOW
  19: Please learn more about my body language so
      we can communicate better. How I ‘feel’ is
      far more important than what I ‘do’.

  14. Good, consistent ongoing socialisation helps
      me cope with your strange ‘human’ world.
      Il need lots of socialisation, but quality is
      more important than quantity.

  shee Make sure I get plenty of quality sleep. When
       I’m growing my body and brain will need
       plenty of quiet ‘download’ time: at 8 weeks
       Pll need 18-22 hours sleep a day; at 12
      weeks, I'll still need around 16 hours of
      ‘shut-eye’ a day.

  16. Please ensure I have a special safe place.
      Sometimes, I may need just a little bit of
      ‘me’ time. Please show me a nice, comfortable
      area I can choose to go to for peace and quiet
      where no one can disturb me.

  Li. All training is about making both of our lives
      better.

  18. I don’t want conflict with you. I need
      guidance.

                                                       47
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

     1o: No dog is ever ‘stubborn’, and I will not
         be the first! I will never think, I know what
         you want me to do. I really want the potential
         reinforcement for doing it ... but I shan’t!


     20; Please don’t feel the need to dominate me,
         that’s not how we Canis Domesticus are put
         together. To be fair, you'll already decide:
             - Where I go
             - Where I sleep
             -~ When I'll sleep
             - When I eat
             —- What I eat
             —- Where I'll poop
             -~ Who I socialise with
             — Pretty much everything I do
     How much dominance do you feel you need over
     me, the little puppy?!

     20%. Dogs are so much better than cats.




48
                Hello again!

   You guessed it: there are no shortcuts,
            you cheeky sausage!

            I’m excited for you.

Enjoy the book and never underestimate how
     important you are to your puppy.


           Back to page 3 you go!




                                             49
                                                                                        a                                  7
                                    4              a     he                   Tre       he       i]      oe

                                                                                ee                       TD
                                    %                                                                         ;
                                                              ee                        i       os       re                                      -_



                                    i,              a                    rh     '   6       1
                                                                                                                           a

                                                riage         olbsli                                                                    a

                              ‘          a ail ba        Pa        me's        Aas          Nivalik                   ¢.                    _


                  | ae
                    patesdtevlicarn md Seuets Iicdomanaiey kacget                                                                               ;
                                                                                                                                            i)

                                                                                                                                        «   :
7                   .        ie   i nae                pong              sirens
                        19                                                                           ahs                       7        =
                                                                    me                               :                                      7
                                            .

                        an   vba    !
                                                                                                                                        a


                             Bitar’ siteleatl lenhars amJ                                                         s                a    a.
                             hon ta               oS                      7                          :                                 a
7               lalLan immitman nveuns bsve dnsivdads i
    7;                  ae mene ot ore wey tsaFgetti
    os      :                Slee lero.                             .                                                 ;            “a
    Z                   =“Wh Savpeoal cryin al                                                            |                aea
        -               > Pretep asuch ser diler-tdo
            aentmaiald ceoutinice lo juss fet yon newt gece 7
            Fs,zl:lesbprt:                             wht               GEL                             Pies




        rs              :ai

—
                    CHAPTER           4

                TORT
               TRAINING


             ‘It’s not a sweet wee puppy,
            it’s a wee Sweet puppy's wee.

Q: What is it men do standing up, ladies do sitting down
and dogs do on three legs?
A: Shake hands!


Believe it or not, as stated by the American Kennel Club,
house soiling is one of the top reasons why dogs lose their
homes or end up in shelters. Can you believe that?! It’s
a good job we’re not as intolerant with kids! Remember,
we invite puppies to come and live in our environment.
We're the host, they’re our guest. It is absolutely our
responsibility to hold their paw (metaphorically, we’re

                                                           ol
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
not a circus!) and guide them through the toilet training
process. It’s simple, but it’s not easy. If you’re consistent,
it’ll be quick but it won’t be overnight.
   Just remember this: puppies toilet when they feel
they need to, and where they feel they have to at
that time. As a teacher, guide them with care and
repetition to show them the place to toilet that pays the
best. If you pay well, as soon as they’re able, they'll be
toilet trained.

N.B.: no puppy will ever pee or poo in your house
‘out of spite’ or ‘to get their own back on you’. To my
knowledge, the only animal that ever did that was David
Jones on a third-year school trip in 1985, but that’s a
story for another time!


                WHY IT HAPPENS
Toileting indoors can happen for a number of reasons:

 ‘ Full bladder control may take up to 20 weeks
   (and a full bladder is the hardest type of bladder
     to control!)

 % Puppy has not yet learned the BEST place to
   wee and poop.
 ‘@’ Submissive urination.

 ‘’ Excitement.
                                   TOILET TRAINING   ,

I sometimes get asked why puppies choose to toilet
on the carpet more often than on a hard floor. Well,
puppies naturally feel the need to go to the toilet on
an absorbent surface. We just need to teach them that
the best absorbent surface is outside. Admittedly, some
dogs that haven’t had an opportunity to wee on grass
will wee on concrete forever because that’s what they
have been conditioned to do. But given the choice, most
dogs want to wee on an absorbent surface.


                   ‘IT’ HAPPENS
Puppies are like us: they do the behaviour that gets
reinforced, so let’s make sure this particular behaviour
occurs in the right place at the right time, and not in
Granny's slipper! A puppy most often wants to go to
the toilet:

  a   First thing in the morning

  a After eating

  Xe After waking

  Xe After play
  Re After a visitor arrives
  Xs After any excitement indoors

  Re Last thing at night

                                                      53
re    EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

      If you see puppy sniffing and circling the
      floor (more on this below)


      Tools You Will Need Before, During
             and After ‘It’ Happens
 A     poo and pee diary (this is what your life has
     come to!)

 @’ A den, child-gate or puppy pen

 @’ A keen eye for puppy body language
 «’ Commitment

 ®’ Correct enzymatic cleaning products
 @° Patience and a good few deep breaths!
    (Although perhaps not when you're cleaning
    up Number Twos!)



 CREATING THE BEST ENVIRONMENT
      FOR;PUPPY, TO SUCCEED
As much as possible until puppy is fully toilet trained,
they should be under supervision with a designated
‘Watcher’, or in their small den area. It is the job of
the Watcher to observe puppy like a hawk for any body
language signals that are a clue that they need the toilet.
Note, however, that they can be unsupervised in their

54
                                 TOILETTRAINING 9
den. Like all of us (I hope!), given the choice, the last
place a dog wants to toilet is where they sleep and
eat, so the den is the perfect location for those short
unsupervised sessions.
   There are other things you can do to set up your home
and environment to give puppy the very best chance of
success. In contrast to some traditional advice, I’m not
a fan of putting down newspaper indoors for puppy to
wee on. As far as I’m concerned, that’s still ‘training’
and conditioning puppy to wee indoors. Ultimately, we
don’t want that behaviour in the house regardless of
what surface they’re on, so let’s start as ‘wee’ mean to go
on. Let’s help puppy learn that toileting outside is the
very BEST thing they could ever do.
   So, following my logic above, we’re going to limit the
opportunities for puppy to make mistakes indoors with
the use of the Watcher and the den. So now, you are
ready and waiting for ‘the signs’.
  ‘But what on earth are the signs that my puppy needs
the toilet?’ I hear you say. Well, I’ve listed above the
environments or moments when they are most likely
to go. There are no hard and fast guaranteed signs but,
for example, sniffing and circling the floor is usually
a pretty good indication - this action is considered a
throwback to when dogs used to check the ground for
snakes and also to soften down the grass before they
drop their butt to eliminate! Other indicators might

                                                        55
re     EASY PEASY PUPPY SOQUEEZY

include whining, pacing up and down or scratching
the door.
  Over time you will pick up the signs, and each puppy is
different, but be patient, be observant and be prepared
to leap into action at any moment! Then, when any
of those signs occur, pick up or encourage your puppy
outside and then wait ... silently ... and wait ... and wait...
  When puppy has gone to the toilet - AND ONLY
WHEN THEY HAVE GONE - it’s carnival time! Treats,
fuss, praise, play - the lot! Whatever your puppy loves
the most, make sure that they receive it immediately
after toileting outside, in order to not only reinforce
the behaviour, but to reinforce the behaviour in the
right place.


The lesson here from pup’s perspective is:
  - Toileting inside = nothing
  - Toileting outside = THE BEST STUFF IN THE
     WORLD!

Who among us isn’t prepared to cross their legs a little
longer to earn THE BEST STUFF IN THE WORLD!?
  So, that’s it, simple, right? Well, not always. For
example, it is entirely possible (probable!) that there will
be many times when you do all of the above perfectly
well (read the signs, take puppy outside, etc) and yet
they haven’t ‘splashed their boots’ or done the deed.

56
                                TOILETTRAINING @
When this happens (or rather doesn’t happen), simply
give puppy a quiet five minutes, then take puppy back
inside again (with no fuss) and put them back in their
den. Then give it another go in 10 minutes. Repeat as
necessary and remember, as soon as puppy does ‘go’
outside ... MAKE LIKE A PARTY!
  A key tip at this point: as tempting as it may seem,
toileting is one particular behaviour where we want
to start the reinforcement process as soon as the
behaviour is complete, NOT as soon as it starts. If
we're a little too trigger-happy with the celebrations
before the toileting is fully done, then puppy will
‘half-wee’, grab the treats from you and then run
inside to finish the ‘job’ on the comfort of your
best carpet!
   One final crucial point here - NEVER punish your
dog if they toilet inside. One ‘old school’ method is
to rub the puppy’s nose in ‘it’. This is disgusting and
totally unacceptable. You wouldn’t rub a dirty nappy
in a toddler’s face! Stay patient, calm and understand
that they are learning how and when to toilet correctly.
It is your job to teach them, not punish or scold them
when it goes wrong. Be consistent, be disciplined and
appreciate your job is to help this baby dog. No matter
how valuable your carpet is, I guarantee it will never be
as valuable as the life and relationship you'll have with
your dog.

                                                      57
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

         YOUR POO AND PEE DIARY
So, here’s the moment that you never thought you’d
get to - keeping a diary of your puppy’s poo and wee.
But there is a very sound logic as to why this is a really
helpful tool. After the initial flurry of Number Ones
and Twos, over a few weeks you'll start to see a pattern
of times that puppy is about to go to the toilet. Keeping
a poo and pee diary will help you ‘customise’ your plan
to suit puppy's needs and to highlight the times of day
you need to be taking puppy outside. Once you have
spotted the patterns, be vigilant - it takes patience and
energy, set an alarm on your phone if need be; it’s a pain
I know, but certainly not as much of a pain as scrubbing
a rug!
  Talking of scrubbing, if an accident has occurred,
use a good enzymatic cleaner and give the area a really
good wash. You need to really thoroughly clean the area,
as dogs will often be drawn back to toilet on areas that
they have previously eliminated on (in the past, marking
a territory would’ve been important and part of their
survival).
  Clean it once and clean it properly.
  The above is the best way to help toilet train puppy.
However, there are three other noteworthy reasons for
puppy still toileting indoors that I should mention.


58
                                   TOILETTRAINING

           TOILETING OVERNIGHT
As I mentioned, puppies won’t want to toilet where
they eat and sleep (see Den training, page 27); however,
those little bladders and bowels can only ‘hold on’
for a certain level of time, so commit to getting
up early at the start of your toilet training regime to limit
mistakes as much as possible. Help your pup as much as
you can, and know that, if done correctly, you can soon
start treating yourself to an extra 10 minutes in your
nest each morning as the toilet training develops.


                 GREETING WEES
Have you ever been soooo happy to see someone that
you've wee’d yourself a little?
  Ahem, no, definitely not me either.
  Some puppies get so overexcited to see their family
or visitors that their little immature urinary sphincters
just cannot hold on and they unwittingly wee as they
say Hello’. Some pups may get so excited that they run
around the house in glee, leaving a trail of urine for you
to clear up (I once saw a puppy spell the word “Hi’!).
The good news is that as the puppy’s sphincter gets
stronger with age, the behaviour usually improves. In
the meantime, if you have an overly excitable greeter,
make sure visitors initially meet the dog outside if

                                                           59
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
possible and keep greetings pleasant and kind, but low
key to limit any chance of over-arousal.


          SUBMISSIVE URINATION
Sometimes known as an appeasement behaviour, this is
when the puppy may lack confidence or is a little fearful
of the human they are being greeted by. As with all of
the above, this is a perfectly normal behaviour, and with
maturity and a development in confidence the problem
will usually disappear over time.
  To help accelerate the process, always look to
develop the puppy’s confidence with people and new
environments. In the short term, try these tips:
 ‘a Greet puppy in an area where if mistakes do
    happen, it’s not the end of the world - the
     garden is an obvious suggestion.

 ‘a’ Appreciate it’s not the puppy’s fault. They
     genuinely cannot help it.

     As ever, avoid the temptation to tell off or
     punish as this will only make puppy more
     frightened and submissive next time, which will
     exacerbate the problem.
 ‘a’ Keep greetings as gentle as possible. Crouch
     down, let pup come to you. A tickle under the

60
                                  TOILETTRAINING @R
   chin is far more preferable than a big, scary
   hand reaching over puppy’s head.
*% Be aware of your own body language: be small,
   be sideways and be slinky. Don’t lean over or
   stare directly at puppy; instead divert your eyes
   and face to the side and let puppy set the pace
   by coming to you.



ae) JARVIS: A Puppy ‘Cocker’ Poo Pee Case Study
 Jarvis, a puppy Cocker, was an amazingly loving
 little dog. A little too loving it turned out as he had
 taken to leaving his family a little ‘present’ behind
 the sofa on a regular basis. I had been around to
 his house a couple of weeks earlier to advise on ‘all
 things puppy’, including toilet training, so I wanted
 to drill down into what was missing from the plan.
    The whole family were waiting for me, poised
 and ready to take notes; nothing motivates a family
 to pull together like an unwanted cockerpoo-or
 two! Once again, I went through the process and
 confirmed everything I had instructed the family
 to do:
 Me: Jarvis is brought outside to toilet at each opportune
 time?
Wf! easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

       Family: YEP!
       Me: Jarvis is not left unsupervised in the living room?
     Ifyou’re with him, you’re watching for his body language
     and if you can’t be with him, you’re making sure he’s
     in his den?
        Family: Mostly!
       Me: Okay. Let’s aim to change that ‘mostly’ to a
     ‘Yep’ for the next few weeks. Now, make sure when he
     does toilet outside, that you’re there to instantly praise
     and reinforce the behaviour with squeezy cheese. (Jarvis’
     favourite!)
        Family: Check!
        Me: ... and you’ve never punished Jarvis for toileting
     inside?
        Dad: Ah!
       Me: Ah?
       Dad: Ah ...
        It turned out that a week previously, when the
     rest of the family were out, Dad had caught Jarvis
     pooping on the carpet and had taken it upon
     himself to shout at Jarvis to tell him off. Adding
     number two and number two together, poor Jarvis
     had learned that toileting in front of humans in
     the living room led to ‘bad stuff happening.
       So, what was the information communicated to
     Jarvis?

62
                               TOILET TRAINING a

  Don’t poo indoors where people may find it.
  The solution from Jarvis’ point of view? Simple.
  Poo behind the sofa!
   Poor old Dad was only doing what he thought
made sense, but punishment will never tell the
puppy what you do want them to do. It will only
leave the pup in limbo and, worse still, afraid of
Dad. That’s no good for anyone. And, besides,
I don’t know about you, but when I’m afraid, I
need the toilet!
   After explaining the ‘fallout’ and negative side
effects of shouting at Jarvis, we made sure that
Jarvis was supervised properly, that he was heavily
rewarded for toileting outside and that under no
circumstances was he to be told off for what was,
let’s face it, human error. In no time at all, hey
presto! ... we were back on track.
   The moral of the story? We get what we reinforce,
and what we punish, well, we may get that too, but
behind the sofa!




                                                       63
                                                                                                       * Pi ft



 ao                                   ae.         pear ee                                                        er           a
 F              |                              a,       Tee                       eeermr                    es
                                                             ae              a               a
 i    iieLior?                          ese             Pe                   wipes         pais      13h    © SRACE

                    a           +e Lae A| ‘ ,                7itSotart aie a               aa ie |   cast    2    stuiuo
 :        jee
                        ;                                =     i       1*.                                                :
 ,
 I    7         2)!                    ub     welodid        frxil!          {ere Pie       Ce        Db         carer hn |


      tei                       Peed            rs                 ai ak         cieke i         Jia: ugly hace                   |



 |
           a                    oat      a=             ronan                ul tz           oa sini’Tab -t
                                      j0'3     ave@eto             a         eae te        sharwind pera
                                  Jesh i Gionse                                  aria edhe
 |     *
      eee
                            .     Aiden bas
                                         ee             ee
                                                             tah                 ar ) yrmenialgezs TA
                                                                   aiving $3 {unimadle, insera.
                                                                                                                                  at


      “ined <ne are ey Se ery Loabearypstan
  J8sigu sot has sic einen HA |
| i
   ane eat Hu Glos wt 98 aul:ana.
      patsOM socks siee nl siwers einiolaL sched
 L             eth pi                                 tie si
                                                          3                           el veate                   Pl
 |Seer
                                                  :                                   z      S    PTE
                                                                                                  one

      408 oh (La                                             ie pce ae
     . i. is fe Ps                      «ty    a aes
                                                                             a ieas                    an
                                                                                                                      i
                                                                                                                      _


          uae lg c ee she
                       CHAPTERS

                BODY
              LANGUAGE



  ‘Communication doesn't start when we speak,
            it starts when we listen.

   magine    if your     friends   ignored   what     you   were
    saying   all the time. You      wouldn’t   want     to hang
out with them any more and you’d soon give up even
trying to communicate with them. You wouldn't remain
friends for very long.
  We ask a lot of puppies to enter our world and play the
game by our rules, and to be fair, they make a bloomin’
good job of it. If they didn’t, I'd have too much work
sorting it all out! We expect - on a daily basis - that they
learn what our odd little verbal squeaks mean; the very

                                                              65
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
least we can do is learn to listen when they’re ‘speaking’
to us.
   If we’re going to raise a puppy to become a well-
rounded, happy and safe dog, we need to try our best to
become canine body language masters.

     No offence, but YOU’RE AN ANIMAL!
     We all are.
     We get body language.
     All animals do.

I want you to be able to read and respond to your puppy’s
body language so if they’re stressed or afraid, you can
recognise their needs and do something to reduce that
stress, or to assure them that you’ve ‘got their backs’. If
they're happy, I want you to instantly know so you can
share their pleasure.
   This doesn’t just apply to your puppy. I want you to
learn to read the body language of all dogs.
   If there’s another dog down the park that looks
uncomfortable, I want you to recognise that so you can
ensure puppy gives that dog the space they need. Not
‘seeing’ that another dog really doesn’t want puppy
in their face can lead to all sorts of conflict and bad
experiences. At best it'll ruin your walk, at worst it could
put your socialisation programme back tenfold.


66
                                 BODY LANGUAGE @&q

RULES OF READING BODY LANGUAGE
Not all bodies are created equal! The tail of a relaxed
Pomeranian will look very different to the tail of a
relaxed Whippet. Therefore, spend time observing the
body language of your own puppy when they’re relaxed
and in a chilled location with not much going on.
Only when you know what your puppy’s body language
looks like in a neutral state, can you then truly take
‘measurements’ to read when puppy may be getting
frightened, over-aroused or fruity!
   When reading a dog’s body language, it’s very
important that we also observe and assess the context and
environment. Body language - or indeed any attempts
at communication for that matter - doesn’t happen in a
vacuum. By looking at the context, we can decide whether
puppy may be panting because they’re stressed with the
fireworks or whether they may be panting simply because
it’s a warm day and they’ve been playing fetch. Puppy may
have a raised paw because they feel apprehensive, or they
may just be getting ready to ‘bat’ the other puppy into
play! Context is everything.
   No one part of the body will 100% guarantee that
puppy is feeling x, y or z emotion. What we need to do
is look at the whole picture - all of the body parts plus
the environment - and then we can make our educated
guess and, if need be, act to help puppy out.

                                                       67
\
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SOQUEEZY
  In short, it is vitally important for us to notice and
respond to puppy's body language. If we don’t listen
and respond to their subtle signals accordingly, then
they may take those appropriate ‘words’ out of their
vocabulary and resort to communicating in CAPS
LOCK. That’s when aggression occurs.


 COMMON BODY LANGUAGE SIGNALS
   AND AREAS TO LOOK OUT FOR

                       Stretching
As always, consider the context. It may be as simple as
a ‘morning stretch’, particularly for long dogs such as
sighthounds. They get up, lean forward to stretch their
back legs, lean back to stretch their front legs, elongate
their necks, then yawn. Only now are they ready for a
gruelling 2334 hours on the settee! It may be part of a
displacement behaviour (see page 77) to say they’re not
comfortable, or it may be a greeting behaviour. When
puppies greet someone they’re familiar with, they'll
often let out a nice slow stretch in a kind of, “What’s up
dude?’ expression.

                        Yawning
A yawn can bea sign the puppy is feeling a little pressured,
perhaps in a situation they're not quite comfortable

68
                                    BODY LANGUAGE @&
with. A yawn is sometimes used as an effort to calm
others around them or as an effort to seek reassurance
from others.


                       Scratching
If it looks like a duck, walks like a duck and sounds like
a duck, chances are, it’s a duck!                       |
   Perhaps puppy just has an itch. However, consider the
context — it may be a displacement behaviour and they
need a little reassurance.

                             Eyes
‘Windows to the soul’ - so much valuable information
can be communicated by the eyes.

 “ Hard, constant stare: can be used as a threat.

     Soft eyes: nice, almond-shaped eyes suggest
     puppy is comfortable.

 ® Diverting eyes: turning away from perceived
     threat, used as a pacifying behaviour.

     Dilated pupils: sign of arousal/stress. It may be
     distress, e.g. I’m scared for my life because of the
     thunderstorm, or it may be ‘eustress’ (happy stress,
     excitement, positive arousal), e.g. Mum’s home
     from shopping oh my, oh my, she’s bought the chicken
     wings, THE CHICKEN WINGS ARE HERE!

                                                            69
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY
 oo Squinty eyes: often an ‘appeasement’ behaviour
     to reduce the need for conflict and to show
     no ill intent. Again, it’s important to consider
     the context. If puppy is proactively approaching
     another dog and showing ‘squinty’ eyes, then
     puppy is demonstrating that they actually
     want to interact and are showing nice clear
     communication skills to display friendly
     intentions. If, however, puppy is showing squinty
     eyes as they’re trying to get away from another,
     over-zealous dog, then you may have to step in to
     give puppy the space they’re asking for.
     Blinking: the opposite of ‘Hard Constant
     Stare’ as on page 69. Shows a relaxed, non-
     confrontational state.

     Whale eye: this is when we see more of the so-
     called sclera (the white of the eye) than normal.
     Often rooted in resource guarding, when
     the puppy orientates their body towards the
     resource they want to keep but directs their
     vision towards the perceived ‘threat’, hence
     more of the sclera is shown.


                         Mouth
     Relaxed: a nice, open, relaxed mouth suggests
     that puppy is comfortable. It’s generally good to

70
                              BODY LANGUAGE           q
be able to see puppy's bottom teeth as that tells
us that the temporalis and masseter muscles in
the puppy’s head and jaw are nicely relaxed.
Horizontal lip retraction: if the lips are
pulled back (like puppy is trapped in a wind
tunnel), that may suggest that puppy is feeling
apprehensive or fearful.
Vertical lip retraction: as Darwin says, when
the body and facial features are drawn up, that
can suggest a ‘threat’ behaviour. Puppy is saying
‘Back away’. This is not a time to tell off or
discipline your puppy. This is an opportunity
to assess the situation and to contact a great
dog trainer to draw up a training plan so puppy
no longer feels under such pressure in similar
situations.

Tight, closed mouth: puppy may be feeling tense.
Another sign of tension around the mouth may
be when you can see the base of the ‘whiskers’
(the posh word for whiskers is vibrissae, swanky
eh?) more than normal, i.e. the pulling forward
of the mouth with emphasis in this area.

                   The Tail
Wagging: ‘But, his tail was wagging...’ is a phrase
I often hear when people tell me about the time

                                                      71
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
        they were bitten by a dog, as if the dog was in
        the wrong! Simple lesson: a ‘waggy’ tail does not
        necessarily mean the dog is being friendly. A
        ‘wagey’ arm from us doesn’t necessarily mean
        we’re waving a cheery ‘Goodbye’. Our ‘waggy’
        arm may be shaking an angry fist!
 Re Erect: a tall, upright tail suggests alertness or
        arousal.

 a Tucked between legs: puppy is nervous or
        scared.

     @° Helicopter: a helicopter tail is when puppy
        moves their tail in a nice, flowing circular
        movement when making a friendly greeting or
        anticipating a happy interaction. Sometimes
        the movement is circular, sometimes it is a very
        artistic figure of eight!

                               Ears
Play the cards you’re dealt here. Due to selective
breeding, you may have a vizsla puppy with V-shaped
ears, a bloodhound puppy (oh my God, shut up, THE
most squeezy pup of all!) with folded ears, or a bat-eared
corgi puppy. Due to the different shapes and sizes of ears,
it’s important to know your pup’s neutral ear carriage -
look at the base of the ear, there’s lots of information to
be had there.

72
                                 BODY LANGUAGE @q
   Erect: erect ears suggest alertness. That alertness
   may be a sign of attentiveness (good) or concern
   (not so good). So, study the context.

Re Pulled back: when puppy’s ears are drawn back
   they may be feeling nervous, apprehensive or
   scared.

   Pinned back: very similar to the above but the ©
   ears are softly pinned back with a comfortable
   soft body and relaxed eyes for greeting a good
   friend.


                        Head
   Head tilt: sometimes called ‘Triangulation’ or
   ‘Orientation Reflex’. It’s when a puppy all of
   a sudden tips their head 45 degrees as if to say,
   ‘Scooby Doo?’ (The purists out there will tut
   at me for being anthropomorphic but I don’t
   care, my puppy tells me that’s ‘quite okay’).
   The head tilt occurs so puppy can figure out
   exactly where the sound is coming from. Their
   ears are working as little satellites to figure out
   distance and orientation, so back in the day
   when they had to make their own living, they
   could leap with pin-point accuracy to grab the
   mouse in the long grass, knowing they’d only
   get one attempt so they’d need to be accurate.

                                                         73
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
        Nowadays, the orientation reflex is best
        employed to work out where exactly that packet
        of crisps was just opened!

                             Feet
Keep an eye on puppy's feet; they're often overlooked
when discussing body language but there’s plenty there
for us to study.
     ® Raised paw: puppies will often raise a paw as
       a sign of anticipation, perhaps when you're
       preparing their meal or about to throw a toy
       for them to chase. In other situations, it may
       illustrate a degree of apprehension. Maybe
       puppy is unsure of another dog that is sniffing
       them a little too vigorously or a strange visitor
        to the house. I also sometimes see a dog gently
        raise their paw when they’re trying to figure out
        a novel or curious situation such as their first
        sighting of a different species.


                       Overall Body
When reading puppy’s body language, it’s good to look at
the overall picture the body is painting as well as all of the
individual features detailed above, to help you gain as
informed an opinion as possible. There’s a lot of similar
messages in our own body language, so use that as your

74
                                  BODY LANGUAGE       @&
first point of reference. For example, consider a friendly
human-to-human approach to say ‘Hello’. An approach
with nice intentions is usually on a crescent: the
Approacher walks in on an arc, a curve.
   When a dog approaches another dog with friendly
intentions, what’s the first thing they do? That’s right,
they sniff butts. By approaching in an arc, the dog’s nose
arrives right at the Information Centre.
   I used to travel to Portugal to watch the beach dogs in
the morning as they waited for the fishermen to arrive
back with their haul. By measuring the footprints in
the sand after a dog-to-dog meeting, I could see that a
crescent approach predicted a friendly meet and greet.
We do the same. When we meet someone for the first
time, we approach on a similar curve, that puts us in the
correct position to shake hands. As we shake hands, our
body is naturally placed on a friendly angle and you'll
notice that some people will actually nod and drop their
head in a subservient manner as they say hello, putting
even more bends in their body. Bends are good!
   If I’m relaxed, friendly and in a comfortable
environment, as I stand chatting to you my feet will be
at ‘ten to two’, there’ll be a bend in my knee, my hips,
shoulders and head will be off to one side, and I won’t
make continuous eye contact with you for more than a
second or two without blinking or diverting my gaze.
   Now consider the opposite: imagine I’m going to

                                                        75
ref EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
approach you with notso-friendly intentions. Before I
even make my approach, my body will be upright, my
feet and knees will be parallel, with my hips, shoulders
and head all on a straight line. My eye contact will
be direct without looking away or blinking every few
seconds. My approach will be straight on, direct and,
undoubtedly, unnerving!
  Same with dogs: straight line approaches, direct ‘hard’
eyes and nose-to-nose front-on meetings are all red flags.
   See, we're not so different after all, are we?
     But if we ever meet, let’s shake hands, yeah, not the
other...

There are other important body language signals that
your puppy may present which are worthy of a mention.
‘Piloerection’ is the technical term for the street phrase
of “Raised Hackles’. This is when the hair stands on the
back of the dog’s neck or along the spine. It’s a sign
of arousal that doesn’t necessarily mean anything good,
it doesn’t necessarily mean anything bad. It means the
dog is aroused, so check the environment and context to
ensure that the arousal doesn’t tip over into something
less welcome. Some ‘experts’ in your local park or dog
club may claim if the hackles are raised on the dog’s
neck it means X and if they are raised further down the
spine it means Y. These people are lunatics, smile and
keep moving!

76
                                  BODY LANGUAGE @q
  Another example is ‘Rocking Horse’, which is when
two dogs are running and playing with each other, and
we see a nice ‘rocking horse’ movement in their spine
as they run. A movement that’s more reminiscent of
lambs gambolling than predators hunting is always
more favourable in dog-to-dog interaction.
  Finally, sometimes you'll see your puppy or other dog
bow. Putting the friendly end up and the pointy, bitey
end down can often be interpreted as a friendly gesture
designed to induce play.


      DISPLACEMENT BEHAVIOURS
A displacement behaviour is a normal canine behaviour
that is being displayed out of context. Displacement
behaviours often occur when the dog is torn between two
conflicting motives, such as ‘avoid’ and ‘approach’. For
example, puppy kinda wants to say “Hi’ to an older dog,
but they’re also kinda scared. You may see a displacement
behaviour from puppy, such as grooming themselves or
they all of asudden ‘discover’ an itch that wasn’t there 30
seconds ago! A displacement behaviour buys puppy time
to assess the situation a little longer. Remember when
you were a kid and you were asked a difficult question
by your Maths teacher, you’d sometimes yawn, play with
your hair, scratch your head or lean back in your chair?
That’s displacement behaviour. Common displacement

                                                         qe
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
behaviours might include sniffing, scratching, yawning
or self-grooming.


                   META SIGNALS
When two dogs are playing, remember they’re
rehearsing pretty hardcore behaviours such as feeding,
fighting, flight and sex. Historically it would have been
important for wild dogs to practise these behaviours
during play so, when the time came, they would be
proficient in delivering the behaviours required for the
survival of the individual, the group and, ultimately,
the species.
  Today, of course, those behaviours are thankfully
not called upon with the same regularity; however,
the ‘wiring’ is still in there. Meta signals are the body
language signs that dogs give off during play that say
‘not really’. So, for example, I’m chasing you to pull you to
the ground so I can rip your vital organs out to feed upon them,
says the German shepherd as he pursues the collie, *...but
not really, look at my meta signals of rocking horse movement
and my open, relaxed mouth. See, just playing!’


            A WORD ABOUT STRESS
Note here that ‘stress’ doesn’t always mean something
negative. We humans always refer to being ‘stressed’ as

78
                                    BODY LANGUAGE iq
a bad thing; however, the true sense of the word just
means our body is shifting from a perfectly balanced
neutral state to getting ready for a ‘call to action’. We
can get ‘stressed’ because we’re off to see our favourite
band (Arctic Monkeys) or we can get ‘stressed’ because
the door-to-door salesmen is ringing our bell yet 8
(Barry Manilow).
  Excitement and fear can have similar physiological
effects on the body, with a cocktail of hormones being
released to activate the sympathetic nervous system.
A puppy may display ‘stress’ body language because
they're afraid of thunder or they may display ‘stress’
body language because you’re about to throw their
favourite toy for them to chase. For example, let’s look
at potential signs of stress:

     Tight, closed mouth
 w   Panting

 w Whining
 w Ears laid back
     Tongue flicks (darting their tongue out of the
     front of their mouth)

 Xe Displacement behaviours (see page 77)

If the stress is generated through a potential confrontation,
then there will be clear signs. When we mammals are

                                                           (6°)
re       EASY PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY

in a threatening mood, our bodies tend to rise up and
lean forward. Charles Darwin referred to this in his
1872 work The Expression of the Emotions in Man and
Animals. If you don’t believe me, drive past a nightclub
on a Saturday night and look at how the doormen are
standing. If puppy is attempting to greet another dog
in a friendly manner but the other dog continues to
posture up and lean forward over puppy, or they’re
showing other threatening behaviour, your job is to get
puppy out of that situation.
     Conversely,   when   we   animals   (dogs included)   are
fearful, our facial expressions and bodies tend to slink
down and away from the perceived threat. Trust your
gut, remember, we’re animals before we’re humans.



Being able to read, understand and respond accordingly
to your puppy’s body language will not only encourage
and improve both of your communication skills, it is
also guaranteed to help build a stronger bond between
you and add to both of your emotional and physical
wellbeing.
  Like I said at the start of this chapter, communication
doesn’t start when we speak, it starts when we listen.




80
                    CHAP TER6

                          SIT



      WHAT DOES A SIT LOOK LIKE?
Butt on the floor, (what else could it be?!)


               WHY TEACH A SIT?
You know what, I can’t remember the last time I’ve had
to teach an owner the initial stages of teaching a puppy
to sit, as it tends to be the bit of ‘software’ that’s already
uploaded into pup before I get my trainer’s hands
on them. However, I do know how often I’ve had to
‘improve’ a puppy's ‘Sit’. Every Single Time!
  It’s not just the case of getting a puppy to sit for one
second and then that’s job done, ‘Off to Britain’s Got
Talent we go!’ There is much more to a good sit than

                                                            81
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
that. A great, reliable sit is by far one of the most precious
exercises you can teach your puppy.


        THE BASIC SIT - PUPPY STEPS
               OF TRAINING
     1. Take a treat and let puppy sniff it. Once
        engaged, slowly raise the treat a few centimetres
        up over puppy’s head. As soon as the head
        raises and the bottom BEGINS TO LOWER say
        ‘Good’, and give puppy the treat.
        Don’t be too greedy here, we want puppy to
        make the incremental steps towards a sit so no
        need to wait for the bottom to touch the floor
        at this stage.

     2. As above, but say ‘Sit’ as puppy lowers their
        bum and delay the ‘Good’ until puppy’s bottom
        actually touches the floor. Make sure the
        bottom is still touching the floor when you say
        ‘Good’. If you’re too slow, puppy may get back
        up again before you mark the correct behaviour.
        ‘Marking a behaviour’ is when you say ‘Good’
        as the behaviour occurs, before reinforcing the
       behaviour (with a treat). It’s important to ‘mark’
       the behaviour so puppy knows exactly what
       behaviour earned them the good stuff. If they

82
                                                     sIT Qa
     know what behaviour paid the dividend, then
     it’s easier for them to recognise what behaviour
     to repeat in future. I tell my clients that marking
     the behaviour is like taking a snapshot of the
     behaviour occurring. You then show the puppy
     the picture and say, ‘See what you're doing
     there, that’s why you got the good stuff.’
  3. That’s it! You have the basic sit. However, there
     is work still to be done.
        All that’s left now is a lifetime of increasing the
     Three Ds: Distraction, Duration and Distance.


        ADDING THE THREE DS TO
              FUNK IT UP!
As I said above, the sit is one of the most important
exercises you can teach your puppy. However, you need
to proof it in so many locations with so many versions of
what is called the Three Ds - distance, distraction and
duration - that it really becomes the kind of behaviour
that, when cued, will happen first time. Note, I want you
to give puppy a ‘cue’ to do a behaviour, rather than a
‘command’. As far as I’m concerned, a command should
only be given when stood arms akimbo, dressed as
Napoleon. A cue is a better word and should be seen
as a positive window or opportunity for puppy, rather


                                                              83
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
than you posing a negative ultimatum. So, let’s sack
‘command’, and go with ‘cue’.
  With this in mind, let me give you an example of the
Three Ds specifically in relation to sit - but this idea
can be used for so many of the techniques that are in
this book. The Three Ds of duration, distraction and
distance really are the Holy Trinity.

Duration: we may want to ask puppy to sit for 60 seconds,
  rather than one.
Distraction: we may want to ask puppy to sit at the dog
  groomers, rather than at home.
Distance: we may want to ask puppy to sit when they’re
  20 metres from us, rather than on the lead.

So how does that work in actual training?

                         Duration
     1. As per the basic three steps, but when puppy’s
       bottom touches the floor, wait one second
       before you say ‘Good’ and reinforce.

     2. As per the basic three steps, but now wait two
        seconds, then three, then four, etc. Don’t always
       progress in ever-increasing incremental steps.
       Keep puppy guessing (and therefore engaged).
       Sometimes reinforce after three seconds, then
       four, then one, then five, etc. Learning, for all

84
                                                   sit
   of us, is never ‘in a straight line’, so training
   shouldn’t be either!

                    Distraction
1. As per the basic three steps, but get a sit, then
   put your hand on your head and if puppy
   remains in a sit, then say ‘Good’ and reinforce.

2. Get a sit and then raise one leg (one of yours!);
   if puppy remains in a sit, then say ‘Good’ and
   reinforce.

3. Get a sit, raise one leg, pat your head and if
   puppy remains in a sit, then say ‘Good’ and
   reinforce. What we’re doing here is teaching
   puppy that sometimes the environment and
   ‘picture’ vary, however we’re keeping the
   common denominator that you saying ‘Sit’
   means they’ll be rewarded for popping their
   butt on the floor, no matter what else is
   happening around them. This is all part of
   proofing the behaviour which you can read more
   about later in this chapter.

4. Keep advancing the distractions as your training
   progresses (once you get to ‘When puppy sits,
   have twelve “cat-jugegling” trapeze artists swing
   overhead as you march around playing the
                                                         85
all EASY PEASY PUPPY SOQUEEZY

       trombone for 10 minutes and if puppy remains
       in a sit, then say “Good” and reinforce’ stage,
       then stop. You’re probably done.)
       As with all of the Three Ds, raise your criteria
       gradually and in waferthin increments. If at any
       stage puppy moves out of the sit before you’ve
       said, ‘Good’, that’s fine. That’s training. Just
       lower your criteria to an achievable standard on
       the next repetition and progress from there.
       Remember: we're training, not testing.

                           Distance
Puppy sits, we move a distance away, then we return, say
‘Good’ and reinforce.
The crowd goes crazy!

     1. Have pup on your left-hand side. Cue ‘Sit’.
        When pup sits, leave your left foot where it is
        and move your right foot a stride away. Count
        one second and bring your right foot back. If pup
        is still in a sit position, say ‘Good’ and reinforce.

     2. Do the above, but start with pup on your right
        hand side. Keep your right foot stationary and
        step away with your left foot. If pup is still in a
        sit position, say ‘Good’ and reinforce.

     3. Time to go for a full step away. Have pup by

86
                                                   sIT Qa
     your side. Cue ‘Sit’. When pup sits, leave your
     foot closest to puppy where it is and move your
     furthest foot a stride away. If pup remains in
     their sit, bring your two feet together so you’re
     now standing a stride away from puppy (if
     youre now not a stride away, you'll never be
     the dancer you hoped one day you would be!).
     Count one second and step back in next to
     puppy. If pup is still in a sit position say ‘Good’
     and reinforce.

  4. As above, but extend to two steps away,
     then three, then four and so on. Vary the
     incremental stages of progression and
     sometimes throw in a shorter version to keep
     puppy focused and engaged.


Vary your starting point as much as possible. Sometimes
cue your puppy to sit when they’re on your left-hand
side, sometimes to your right. Cue them to sit when
they’re facing you and if you’re feeling flash, have a go
at getting a sit when puppy’s back is to you - if you’re
successful with that one, then you're heading to Sitting
Ninja Level!

When training any exercise, if puppy is struggling, drop
at least one of your Three Ds. To advance an exercise,

                                                           87
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
increase one of your Three Ds. Only slightly though,
don’t be greedy!


                PROOFING THE'‘SIT’
‘He always does it at training class, but he never does
it at home’ is a common mantra | hear from owners at
training classes, and that’s because they haven’t proofed
the behaviour. Proofing your training is the way to get
fluency and reliability for all your cues for all occasions.
     Don’t just practise in one area. To generalise your
training and make it as reliable - and therefore as
valuable - as possible, you need to practise in as many
different locations as you can. Be creative, the only thing
holding you back is your imagination!
  Make your puppy a sitting* machine! (*Note to self:
spellcheck essential!) When you’re willing to bet £100
hard cash that puppy will sit when you ask, then start
transferring the behaviour into more and more realistic
scenarios such as: doorbell rings / you go with puppy to the
door (on lead to start with) / you open the door / a visitor is
there / you ask puppy to ‘Sit’ / puppy sits and remains sitting
/ the visitor steps in and goes down low to say ‘Hi’ to reinforce
the sit at puppy’s level (going down to say ‘Hi’ at puppy’s
level is super-important in the early sessions as it takes
the desire to jump up out of the equation).


88
Raise the treat and
when pup’s bottom
touches the floor,
say ‘Good’ and
reinforce.




Start at the
beginning... then
add distractions!
                      The Rucksack Walk




                                      Introducing the
                                      Rucksack Walk.




Explore together...




                                      ‘OMG... OMG!’




Pure connection.
                The Rucksack Walk, Out and About


                                       A 15-minute Rucksack
                                       Walk will not only help you
                                       and puppy connect, It'll
                                       bring you to a place us
                                       humans rarely get to go.




Make sure you have a
‘thing’ with you — anything
that is safe for puppy to
investigate.

                                        meo
                                        wim   *




                                       Have a Tupperware box
                                       handy, containing a
                                       new smell...




...and a box containing a
new food.


Using all of these things,
you get the opportunity to
just enjoy spending time
with pup, strengthening
your bond.
                             Safe Swaps




Play w ith toy A




                                                            toy A,
                                                        ’
                                          Li_—® ® N ®

                                          Say Out
                                               ‘            ’

                                                                ’   and
                                          In troduce                toy B.
            a=




As AS            i —oO > a
        =
   >
                                                                             Play
      SE
       eye ee     aero
                     te OESEESEESAESOE SUNYSSTEHLESSUAVESR TENET NEESOd Lisl PenpSR OS Seu   See   Eee EE   STURT




                                                                                                                    Hiae
                                                                                                                    yee
                                                                                                                     ae


                                                                                                                    eh)
                                                                                                                    ssa




‘Play is the highest
form of research’ —
Albert Einstein
                    Friends, Above All Else




Play is training,
training is play.
            Play Away




                             ey         &   east
                         mretcanllted   5Sala

Play with sincerity, it’s a team game.
               Safety, Connection and Joy




Dogs won’t always know what you’re saying, but they’ll always know
                     how you make them feel.
                                                   sIT ta

    TEACHING THE AUTOMATIC SIT -
      ALL GOOD THINGS COME TO
           THOSE THAT SIT!
We want puppy to be thinking:
  If in doubt, ‘Sit’
  If I think there’s something in it for me, ‘Sit’
  How can I get Dad to give me a treat? Oh yeah, ‘Sit’
  How do I get Granny to say ‘Hi’ to me? ‘SIT!’

            How to Train the Automatic Sit
Train a sit in the first instance by luring puppy’s head
up with a treat and when the bottom touches the floor,
say ‘Good’ and deliver a treat.
Get 10 out of 10 as above for a few sessions.

  1. Lure as above. A split-second prior to puppy’s
     bottom touching the floor say ‘Sit’? and when
     puppy sits, say ‘Good’ and treat as above.

  2. When you can achieve stage (1) perfectly, three
     times a day for two days, then move on to stage
     (3).
  3. Have five treats. Lure puppy into a sit and give
     your cue ‘Sit’, puppy sits, then reinforce by
     rolling the treat along the ground so puppy can
     run, pick it up then return to you.

                                                         89
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
       As soon as puppy returns to you, ask for a ‘Sit’,
       mark with a ‘Good’ and reinforce as above by
       rolling the treat.
       After a few repetitions, as puppy returns to
       you just stand still, don’t massively change
       your body position from what puppy has seen
       previously, but don’t ask for a ‘Sit’. Here’s
       where puppy needs to get their thinking cap
        on ... Why’s Mum not rolling food? How do I make
        her roll food? What made her roll food last time ...
        Oh yeah! BOOM! As soon as puppy’s bottom
        touches the floor you say ‘GOOD!’, roll that
        food and wait for puppy to run back to you to
        plant that sweet derriére again!

     4. Now it’s time to ‘take it on the road’. Get other
        people to do all the stages. When consistently
        successful, do it in other places. Do it with
        added distraction. Do it for longer durations
        (time between puppy sitting and you saying
        ‘Good’).


Practise your Automatic Sit in so many locations that
puppy has absolutely no doubt what behaviour to offer
to make the good times roll.



90
| se) CASE STUDY: Sit Just Got Real!
: I remember one of my training sessions with the
| England international footballer and all-round
  good guy, Theo Walcott, and his dog Diesel, a
  beautiful black German shepherd. Now, Theo
| had a long list of training desires for Diesel:

     . Don’t jump up onto people to say ‘Hello’.

     . Don’t ‘mug’ me at feeding time!

     . When playing chase and retrieve, don’t grab
       the tennis ball when the human tries to pick
       it up, so they can easily throw it again.

     . Make life easier to leave the park, even
       when playing with other dogs.

| Now, cues that were previously (unsuccessfully)
| being given to Diesel for points 1 to 4 were:
   % Don’t jump up onto people to say ‘Hello’.
     Cue: ‘No’.

   * Don’t ‘mug’ meat feeding time! Cue: ‘Off.

   * When playing chase and retrieve, don’t
     grab the tennis ball when the human tries
     to pick it up. Cue: ‘Leave it’.


                                                      91
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY



      ® Make life easier to leave the park, even
        when playing with other dogs. Cue:
        ‘Come’.

     Now, at best that’s four different cues that were
     being given to Diesel which would need a ton of dog
     training hours to really enable them to be solid. I'll
     be honest, I’m really not a fan of the cues, ‘No’, ‘Off
     or ‘Leave it’ anyway. None of those three cues tell
     the dog what you actually do want. They’re extremely
     vague requests that make it almost impossible for the
     dog to figure out what behaviour you want.
       When giving a cue to the puppy, always know
     what the behaviour looks like. Think about a
     situation when you might instinctively want to say
     to the dog, ‘No’, ‘Off or ‘Leave it’. Describe the
     scenario to yourself now.
       If it begins with ‘I want the dog to not ...’ then
     STOP!

     ‘Not’ doing something is not a behaviour.
          Not jumping up on guests

          Not jumping up to the food bowl

          Not picking up the food


92
 * Not grabbing the ball
     Not running off with other dogs

Anything that begins with ‘not’ isn’t an actual
behaviour we can cue.
  Why? Because it doesn’t pass the Dead Dog Test.


              The Dead Dog Test
If a dead dog can achieve it, then it isn’t a behaviour
you can cue.
  E.g. a dead dog won’t jump up on you. A
dead dog won’t grab the food. (If it does, it’s a
Zombiedoodle. RUN!)
  What I’m saying here is simple: always ask the
dog for what you do want them to do, not what
you don’t want them to do. It’s a much cleaner way
to train.
  So, back to Theo and Diesel’s training dilemmas.
I’m all for a simple life, so I will always ask myself
or the client:

  1. What would this look like if it were simpler’?
  2. What one exercise will render all other
      exercises unnecessary’


                                                          93
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

     For this case it’s easy - the clue is the title of this
     chapter! ‘SIT’

      ” Don’t jump up onto people to say ‘Hello’.
          Cool, teach Diesel that people only say ‘Hello’
          when his bottom is on the floor. Then ‘sit’ is
          the behaviour and the subsequent ‘Hello’ is the
          reinforcement.

          Don’t ‘mug’ me at feeding time!
          Cool, ask for a sit when preparing and putting
          down Diesel’s food.

          When playing chase and retrieve don’t jump
          all over the ‘human’ when they try to pick
          the ball up to throw again.
          Ask for a sit before you go to pick up the ball. If
          Diesel lunges for the ball at the same time as you,
          then you need to improve your ‘sit with duration’
          (see Three Ds on page 83)

          Make life easier to leave the park, even when
          playing with other dogs.
          Get your sit at a distance, go over, pop the lead on
          and heavily reinforce.
          Sometimes reinforce the sit by releasing Diesel
          again with a ‘Go play!’. He'll love you forever and


94
     he'll learn that sitting doesn’t always mean that
     the dog play ends.

Of course, with Theo and Diesel this meant that
we had to do lots and lots and lots of sits in as many
different locations and environments as possible,
plus we had to proof those sits with a myriad of
distractions, durations and distances. This was a
challenge in terms of time because international
sports superstars don’t have a ton of domestic dog
training hours! However, Theo applied himself
brilliantly, plus the beauty was that the solution
was all based around one basic position: sit.
  As the famous martial artist Bruce Lee once said,
‘Don’t fear the man that has done a thousand
kicks; fear the man that has done the same kick a
thousand times.’
   As Steve Mann, the not-so-famous dog trainer,
says, Don’t trust the pup that has done a thousand
exercises, trust the pup that has done one exercise
a thousand times.’




                                                         95
                                                           ts                        -




                                                       7        ——           ————————
                                                                                         Saray



                                                                     -
                                                                     e      ‘|       eA          ing Ay
                                                                                                      an



    *


                                                                                         i.                 “S     ae    s
                                            ‘                              arr                iA    Up       i    aprta        ta Pay ie

                                                            ‘=        t:   >}        ra &“ 2 baat
                                                                                          ‘             ‘          a
                                                                                                                          OP   Le2       ee
                                                                                                                                                  -
                   .             swe        ws                   :          eee                         3        at re     Seid               ©

    .        4 }             ;    8                  #o fj ‘ ‘ be pene 5 rg
                                                                          oy as he A aa eying

             :          =f             mf        4    gw              sail           bes            Move                  eS
-
hat          : oftaea rch wil                                                        sn ae                               at es                |
:            .
                   dyaby uh                      she Se rhe by ary uf * yin Sverre gal Le                                                         :
                   Hepes                    SAG                      “it                      pe                   eg          prices                 7
             '|    GH                           sala.
                                                2 toc). capes                                               | arabe
             }                   . > . id) pee) ay) ariane
                                                         bate
                                                            iy                                                                       )
             - fan esvebnls url 7wae Wpiseee dbaradetenhfoie
        a
                   of
                                                                                 A

                   be pig5! hoe 4 Me
                                   pal                                                        ey cpa                      agg al ab a

                   & isdverewe Bag Hine it
                                         oie wbaJ
                                                ne
                                                -                                                                                             ie


                                                                heerh                                                          i:
        to        Asai                                          fue                                yin                          eke                   od
                  , baie                         cemete dnnt
7
                 biti sibel ieee ioPoeala
a                                                          Hao  Lae         rae                     -
                                                                                                                                 -
                   cr        Wes,

               MOUTH
              MANNERS


      ‘Biting and Chewing. Owww! So Cute!’


           YOUR PUPPY’S TEETH:
             A BRIEF HISTORY
Puppy teeth start to break through at approximately two
to three weeks of age, during the “Transitional Stage’ of
development. A lot goes on during this crucial phase:
the ears and eyes begin to open, puppy starts moving
away from total mother dependence, then begins to
stand and walk by 21 days. As soon as they’re mobile,
puppy starts looking to explore and gets up to all sorts
of mischief with their siblings from thereon in.
  Puppy is now at the dawn of learning to play,

                                                       U7
Wf easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
investigating the world and even learning to find out
what’s ‘alive or not’, and consequently they need those
razor-sharp teeth to help with the fact-finding missions.
  At this age, puppy doesn’t have much strength in their
jaw, so the teeth need to be super-sharp to get the desired
responses and information from the world. As puppy
heads towards 12 weeks of age and the jaw becomes
stronger, then those baby teeth begin to be pushed
out by the set of 42 adult teeth that are impatiently
waiting behind. (18 weeks is the time to start wearing
your thickest socks around the house because when you
tread on one of those discarded puppy teeth, it makes
Lego feel like marshmallows!) So, before we talk about
mouth manners just bear in mind there’s a lot going on
in puppy's mouth.


               MOUTH MANNERS
Play biting, I know, it hurts. I feel your pain, but it’s not
forever. Play biting is part of your puppy’s education; it’s
an opportunity to learn and therefore an opportunity
for you to teach. Hurrah! If puppies weren’t so damn
cute, there’s no way we’d forgive them for all of those
scars! Well, something has to redress the balance for
those little land sharks’ teeth digging into our hands,
ankles, nose and (“insert delicate body part here*) for the
umpteenth time!

98
                                  MOUTH MANNERS 9
  Here’s how to keep play biting to a minimum. If you
have a puppy that loves to play bite, Rule #1 is don’t try
to handle puppy when they are over-aroused. You'll set
everyone up for failure. Arousal inhibits learning. If you
pick a up puppy when they don’t want to be handled,
they may decide to bite you and you may decide to put
them down. So, what has puppy just learned? Biting
WORKS! Ooops.
  When puppy is relaxed, then stroking, gentle play
with a toy and hand-feeding awesome treats will all go
towards adding more credit to the Puppy’s Personal
Bank of Monkey’s hands are cool, enjoy them being with you
and don’t tell them to go away.
  If/when puppy forgets that rule and they put a tooth
on any human skin whatsoever, immediately say, “Too
bad’ and walk away.
  It’s worth repeating: puppies, like us, learn through
consequences to behaviour. As a consequence to biting,
we never want to give puppy anything bad (EVER) such
as shouting, tapping them on the nose, etc, but we
can deliver the notso-cool consequence of stopping/
removing ‘the good stuff. In this scenario, you are the
source of the good stuff. (Congratulations!)
  Therefore,    the    lesson    becomes:    appropriate
interaction = you and the ‘good stuff staying with
puppy; inappropriate action (namely biting) = you
remove yourself. D’oh!

                                                        99
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
  So, simply remove yourself from the room just for two
to three minutes. When you return you can gently start
interacting again. A soft plush toy as an attractive third
party to bite instead of your hand is a good option at
this point!
  With enough consistent repetition, puppy will learn
to offer the behaviour that pays dividends, and therefore
stop offering behaviour (such as biting) that results in
the good things disappearing. This needs to be done in
a matter-of-fact manner and never with any emotion or
the attitude of a telling-off.
  Don’t stress, it’s normal, it hurts, but it stops.
  It won’t happen overnight; training is a process, not
an event.

  Keep the faith.


                     CHEWING
Q: When does a chew toy stop being a chew toy?
A: When puppy finds something better to chew!


There are two reasons why puppies chew: teething and
exploration. You need to understand and appreciate
both, because simply shouting or chastising puppy for
this behaviour will achieve nothing but upset.



100
                                  MOUTH MANNERS @q
                        Teething
Have you seen the torment that human babies go through
when they’re teething? The stress and angst that makes
babies cry hour upon hour as they try and cope with 20
baby teeth erupting in their little mouths? Well, double
that torment and you'll start to appreciate the pressure
puppy is under as the 42 adult teeth I mentioned above
all start to hustle and build the necessary momentum to
evict those no-longer-welcome puppy teeth. This part of
their young lives is not a pleasant experience for puppy.
And remember, they have no way of telling you how
much pain they are in.
   Chewing has two benefits to puppy here:

  1. It helps alleviate that pressure.

  2. It helps persuade the baby teeth to make good
     their escape.


We call it chewing; a more sympathetic description
would be pain relief. Chewing ANYTHING is perfectly
normal puppy behaviour; when puppies are chewing, it
releases all those nice endorphins into the brain to help
relax and chill them out, as a stress relief. Some people
bite their nails when they are stressed. So, chewing
furniture is perfectly normal behaviour. Soz!


                                                      101
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

                      Exploration
Another motivator for puppy to ‘chomp the Chester-
field’ is exploration. All babies need to explore as much
and as soon as possible to become familiar with the
big wide world. Us human babies reach out and try to
touch everything we can with our hands. Dogs aren’t
blessed with such apparatus (how strange they'd look
if they were!?), so it’s the puppy’s mouth and teeth that
need to knuckle down and explore everything. And I
mean everything!

                The Chewing Remedy
Our job here is not to stop chewing. Accept that puppy
has a ‘dog-given right’ of four hours chewing per day.
Your decision is not ‘to-chew-ornotto-chew’,             but ‘to-
chew-what?’
  Therefore, our job is to provide as many legal chewing
opportunities as possible each day.

 ILLEGAL CHEWING                LEGAL CHEWS
 Cables                     a
                                Stuffed Kong
 Carpet                         Rope toy
 People(!)                      Nylabone
 Table                          Safe food chew from pet store
 Walls                          Appropriate toy
 Stone Roses albums             Barry Manilow albums



102
                                MOUTH MANNERS @&
We'll adopt a two-pronged attack: control and manage-
ment (which you know all about now, see page 22)
and offering an alternative item to chew. In the
context of chewing, control and management simply
means   not providing opportunities for the puppy to
practise the unwanted behaviour. For example, do not
leave puppy alone in an area with anything that you do
not want chewed:

 ‘If puppy chews the furniture and you weren’t
   watching, it’s your fault.

     If puppy chews a cable and you weren’t
     watching, it’s your fault.

     If puppy chews the wall and you were watching,
     what is wrong with you?!

In a nutshell, do not let puppy practise (and therefore
be reinforced) for chewing anything you don’t want
chewed. If there is a time when you cannot watch puppy,
then pop them in their den to see if the Den Wizard
has been (if you’ve forgotten the Den Wizard (already?!)
then see page 30).
  Always have a constant supply of freely available legal
chew ‘outlets’. If puppy has the desire (and the right) to
chew, your watertight control and management mixed
with the right number of legal alternatives will keep your
Jimmy Choos from becoming Jimmy Chews.

                                                       103
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SOQUEEZY


           AN ADDITIONAL TOOL:
         A POSITIVE INTERRUPTER
Believe it or not, sometimes, just sometimes, you may
spot puppy doing something you wish they weren’t. I
know, right?! For example, there’ll be times when youre
shattered, you’ve been chasing puppy round all day, it’s
8pm and you've just sat down to watch TV and have
10 minutes to yourself. Puppy is on the floor, checking
out the room and just as you exhale to relax into the
settee, you see them wandering over to the dining room
table leg (cue Jaws theme tune ... Duuuun dun, duuun
dun), puppy has a little sniff of the glorious wooden
limb (dun dun dun dun dun dun dun dun...) and then
ever so gently they place their little mouth around that
table leg for a good old chomp ... DAH DAH DAAA!
  Now is not the time to jump to attention and tell
puppy off.
  It’s not puppy’s fault.
  It never is.
  A pup’s gotta chew what a pup’s gotta chew.
  Now is the time to employ what us dog trainers call
a conditioned ‘Positive Interrupter’. | hear you saying,
‘What on Earth does that mean?’
  Don’t panic, Mr Mainwaring!



104
                                   MOUTH MANNERS ®Q

  What on Earth is a Positive Interrupter?

From puppy’s perspective,       a positive interrupter is a
super-special sound that whenever they hear it, they
drop whatever they are doing and run straight to the
source of the sound because that’s where the good
times are!
  From   your    perspective,   a positive   interrupter   is a
friendly noise that you will make whenever you want
puppy to stop what they’re doing in order to be directed
on to something more constructive and suitable instead.

  For example:

  1. Puppy goes to chew the furniture.

  2. Owner makes positive interrupter sound.

  3. Puppy immediately forgets what they’re doing
     and runs to owner.

  4. Owner treats puppy and gives them a more
     suitable toy to chew.

But why is a positive interrupter better than simply
saying, ‘No’ or ‘Stop it’? Well, for starters, ‘No’ as a
punishment will not tell puppy what to do. ‘No’ as a
punishment will be associated with you, which is poor
for your relationship. It can frighten puppy. It can put

                                                            105
Wf easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
us in a bad mood. Plus, we’re faaaaar too smart to have
to resort to physical or psychological intimidation to
stop a little puppy from doing an undesirable behaviour.
Surely?
  Crucially, if you just say ‘No’ or ‘Stop it!, puppy will
learn that when you’re not there, the bad punishment
won't happen, so it’s fine to chew the furniture in your
absence!


       Making Your Positive Interrupter a
         Super-Strong Muscle Memory
Choose a sound that is short and succinct. Perhaps
a ‘kissy-kissy’ sound or a word that is difficult to use
in anger such as ‘yahoo!’ or ‘yippee!’ Then ‘pair’ that
sound a number of times to give it a really strong positive
emotional reaction. So how do you do that?

  1. Have puppy next to you.

  2. Say ‘Yippee!’ and within one second give puppy an
      amazing treat.

  3. Repeat several times, in several locations over
     several days.

  4. With enough correct repetition, puppy will
     not be able to resist dropping whatever they’re
     doing and running to you whenever they hear
      that cherished ‘PI.’

106
                                MOUTH MANNERS @&,
  5. When conditioning the sound, make sure you
     say the sound first, then produce the treat. We
     don’t want the treat to be in the picture until
     the sound has been made. It’s the sound that
     predicts the treat, not the other way around.

When I look at helping owners with ‘puppy problems’,
sometimes I simply need to address the symptoms,
sometimes I need to dig a little further and address the
cause, sometimes both. The symptom is what they’re
doing, the cause is why they’re doing it.
   If, for example, puppy is chewing furniture because
of good old-fashioned teething issues, then I address
the symptom directly - the chewing. I just need to
control access to the furniture and offer plenty of cool
alternatives to chew.
  If, however, after a brief consultation with the owner,
I feel puppy is chewing because they simply don’t have
anything better to do, then I need to address the cause.
The cause is most likely boredom or a lack of physical
and mental outlets throughout the day. We don’t tackle
the chewing head-on, we take a more holistic approach
and build a lifestyle and daily routine that aims to
render the cause redundant. That routine will include
more regular outlets for puppy each day, such as games,
training, sniffing and other cool puppy pursuits (Note
to self: spin-off board game idea!) that satisfy puppy’s

                                                       107
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
desire for outlets so much that the idea of chewing
furniture ‘just for kicks’ simply becomes extinct.


 se CASE STUDY: Try Dijon for Size
      Around 20 years ago I was called out to do a
      house visit in Tottenham to help a man whose
      Border collie puppy was, in his own words, ‘eating
      the bleedin’ house!’ When I got there the gent
      greeted me at the front door with a big grin and
      said, ‘Ah, you must be the dog trainer. No need. I
      think we’ve sorted it!’
        No, dear Reader, they had not ‘sorted it’.
        What they had done, however, was cover the vast
      majority of their walls and furniture in mustard.
      Mustard! The smell was overpowering, it made my
      eyes water. I swear, it looked like Colonel Mustard
      had been battered to death with a jar of mustard
      in the Mustard Room! Cue the inevitable ‘my
      mate reckons’ source of this approach.
         Dog owner: “My mate down the park that knows
      about dogs told me to give mustard a go.’
         Me: ‘Well, he may “know about dogs” but he
      doesn’t know much about interior design, does
      he?!’



108
                               MOUTH MANNERS

 After agreeing to wipe off all the mustard,
 here’s what we did:


. Mental and physical outlets: we agreed a plan
  that his Border collie puppy got sufficient
  and regular mental and physical outlets
  throughout the day to ensure that the chewing
  wasn't out of pure boredom. These outlets
  came in the form of regular exploratory walks,
  search games in the garden for treats and toys,
  short training sessions in the garden, and
  ‘interactive’ feeding toys such as stuffed Kongs
  to offer legal, safe and constructive chewing
 opportunities.

. Control and management: ensure a plan was in
  place that when the puppy was at home, they
  were either being supervised by someone in
  the household or, if that wasn’t possible, they
  were in their den, which we taught pup was a
  fantastic place to relax in.

. Offer plenty of alternative and legal chew toys:
 some pups will favour hard chew textures,
 such as tough rubber or plastic, and on
 occasions they may prefer a softer chew


                                                     109
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

      alternative, such as softer rubber or fleece toys.
      Make sure that chewing is supervised to avoid
      fractured pieces being ingested and also that a
      broad variety of textures are offered to
      accommodate changing needs and the desire
      for novelty.


      The moral of the story: no matter how bad the
      puppy chewing is, mustard is never the answer!




110
                     Creer            Rs

       SOCIALISATION




      s humans,     boy, do we   ask a lot of dogs when
        we take them into our world to live in our dens
under our rules. The very least we should do is help them
feel safe and enjoy this weird planet we now occupy
together. A key part of maximising and enjoying this
shared experience — for both you and your puppy —
is socialisation.
   It’s a big word but a simple concept. “Socialisation’
is primarily about creating as many varied, positive,
safe and enjoyable experiences for your puppy as you
can, as soon as possible in their life to build a strong
‘social’ immunity and to avoid future scary surprises
and experiences later in life.
  Not only is the well-socialised dog more ‘environ-

                                                       ae
re    EASY PEASY PUPPY SOUEBEZY

mentally bombproof in unusual situations, but it has also
been proven over and over again (by studies on military
dogs, police dogs, guide dogs, assistance dogs and, yes, pet
dogs) that a dog that’s experienced diverse socialisation
from a young age will be healthier and happier, easier to
train and consequently easier to live with.
  So, when is the best time to start socialising your
puppy? NOW!
   Believe it or not, at this young age, how puppy
feels is far more important than what puppy does.
Sometimes as owners and trainers we can get a little
bogged down in teaching good behaviours such as ‘Sit’
and ‘Down’, at the expense of focusing our time on
helping puppy make good associations to the world
around them. So, remember this very important edict:
to puppy, being safe is far more important than being
obedient.
   Of course, throughout this book you'll see all the
exercises I’d like you to teach puppy as soon as possible,
but your investment in training will go out of the
window in times of need unless puppy feels safe and
secure. If puppy feels safe, happy and confident in all
environments, then the training that sits on top of that
is so much easier compared to the same experience with
an anxious or insecure pup.
   Let’s not put the cart before the horse.
   Prioritise. You’ve got years to teach fancy dog tricks

it2
                                   SOCIALISATION a
(if you really must), but you’ve only got a few weeks
to teach puppy how to be a confident, optimistic
adult dog.
  Start now.
  The most valuable, precious period is between 3
and 12 weeks of age. Although socialisation really is
a continuous process throughout your dog’s life, the
potency of positive exposure diminishes day by day as
puppy matures.
   So, let’s backtrack right to the birth. The moment
puppy pops out into this world until about two weeks
of age is known as the ‘Neonatal Stage’. Generally
speaking, at this point puppies are just wet, furry slugs!
At this stage, around 90% of the time puppy is sleeping,
as nearly all their energy is dedicated to growth. The
only senses that are up and running are smell, taste and
touch. These are required to find Mum for food, warmth
and protection. The rest can wait. When I come back, I
want to come back as a Neonatal Pup - what a life!
  Next up is the “Transitional Stage’, from two to
four weeks. Their ears and eyes begin to open, by 15
days they can stand and a week later they are walking
(albeit like drunks!). Pups start moving away from
total dependence on their mother, play begins and
puppy teeth start to come through (see page 101 for
more on Teething).
  The third part is known as the ‘Socialisation Stage’,

                                                       113
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
from 3 to 12 weeks. This consists of initially the
‘Primary Socialisation’ at the breeders (with Mum,
the littermates and all the surroundings), which is
around three to five weeks. This is the opportunity for
puppy to build positive associations and relationships
with littermates and Mum through play and other
interactions. Ideally where puppy was born and then
initially raised will have had lots of exposure and access
to different sights, sounds, textures and smells to kick
start the socialisation process.
  Thereafter the ‘Secondary Socialisation’ begins, when
they are exposed to everyone and everything both in the
new home and the outside world. Chances are, puppy
has stayed with the breeder up until the age of seven or
eight weeks. By the time you pick up your new puppy
to come home with you, they have generally gained a
degree of independence away from littermates, while in
turn Mum begins to lose motivation to nurse her pups,
making it a naturally convenient time for pups to be
welcomed into their new home.
  As soon as possible, get yourself out and about with
puppy to as many different environments as you can
and let them learn and experience that the world’s
okay. This will not happen by itself. It takes a little
commitment from you but it can, and should, be fun
for both of you.
  Socialisation is a matter of urgency and although I’m

114
                                    SOCIALISATION QR
not one for melodrama, it can literally be a matter of life
and death. Every day dogs are destroyed for ‘behavioural’
reasons. The ethics of this are a debate for another
day and maybe another book; however, the fact of the
matter is, a well-socialised, loved and trained family dog
will rarely be put on that dreaded appointment list.
   Hopefully you now understand why socialisation is so
important and when you should start, so now it’s time
to discuss ‘how’. Exposing your puppy to everything in
the world before they’re even 12 weeks old is quite a tall
order but the good news is, the more you can do, the
easier and more beneficial it is for puppy.
  There’s a lot to do, so let’s break our socialisation
targets down into two groups: ‘Environments’ and
‘Things’. Environments are just places (which are full
of “‘Things’) and a “Thing’ is what posh trainers call a
‘Stimulus’. A stimulus is something that can evoke a
reaction. How puppy reacts to these stimuli is dictated
by their emotions and how well they have been
socialised. For example, a desired reaction from puppy
to the sound of a knock on your front door could be
a waggy tail in anticipation of a friendly visitor. An
undesired reaction from puppy to the sound of a knock
on your front door could be a bloodcurdling episode of
barking and throwing themselves at the window in the
expectancy of a perceived enemy!
  So first up, ‘Environments’...

                                                        115
rf EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

        Exposure Table for Environments
(I’ve left some boxes blank for you to complete with
puppy yourself, so grab a pen, put your coat on and
get going!)

 Environment          Sights      Sounds           Smells      Textures

 Outside the          Revolving   Air brakes       Diesel      Welcome
 supermarket          doors       People           Bakery      mat
                      Lorries     chatting         Perfume   | Tarmac
                      Trollies    PA System                    Low brick
                                                               wall

 School gates         Children    School           School      Astro
                      running     bell             bins        turf
                      Ice-cream   Shouting         Ice-cream | Grass
                      van         children         Exhaust     Pavement
                                  Ice-cream        fumes
                                  van chimes

 Family BBQ

 Football match
                                               |
 Outdoor market

 Pet store
Ns                |                                                        e:




116
                                   SOCIALISATION (eq
To close this segment, a quick word on a dog’s sense of
smell. We can only imagine how puppies experience
the world through their noses. We have 5 million
olfactory receptors in our nose, but a dog has 220
million! They can smell one part urine to a million
parts water. If you walk into a bakery, you will be hit by
that lovely smell of warm bread. Yum. However, the
pup will go in there and smell flour and water and
sugar and perfume and the car that is parked outside
and the fumes from the delivery driver and what is on
our shoes and a baby’s nappy and the cigarettes one
customer smoked that morning and on and on and
on. There is just a kaleidoscope of smells crashing in
on them all the time. Meanwhile, us apes just go in
and say, ‘Mmmm, doughnuts.’ So never overestimate
the importance of smell to a puppy’s experience and
socialisation.


And now ‘Things’ or ‘Stimuli’...

Of course, on top of the obvious ‘sights’ puppy will see,
always account for the additional sounds, smells and
textures that are just as important in socialisation, as
is the time of day. Exposure needs to happen at night-
time, as well as in daylight.



                                                       117
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
            Exposure Table for Things/Stimuli
               People                           Animals          Textures
 Elderly                               Puppies                Sand
 Children                              Dogs                  Water
 Loud                                  On-lead                Metal
 Quiet                                 Off-lead               Brick
 Active (running, playing)             Passive                Paper
 Passive (seated, reading)             Active                 Bubble wrap
 Nationality                           Male                   Polythene
 Clothed/types of dress                Female                 Wooden
 Unclothed/nudity                      Neautered              Tiled
 Teenagers                             Unneutered             Rubber
 Glasses/sunglasses                    Cats                   Smooth
 Gender                                Rabbits                Rough
 Uniforms and hats                     Inside                         Weather
 Day-time
                             -+———+
                                       Outside              | Wind
 Night-time                            Chickens               Rain
             Vehicles                 Sheep                   Sunny
 Cars                                  Cows                   Snow
  Lorries                              Birds                | Thunder
  Buses                                Horses                 Lightening
 Trains (overground)                             Smells       Hail
 Trains (underground)                  Perfume                       Heights (with
  Bikes                                Cooking                        due care)
 Tricycles                             BBQ                    On wall
  Go-carts                             Cigarette smoke        Above head
 Trollies                              Bins               __| On bridge
  Skateboards                         | Bonfires              Under bridge
 Wheelchairs, crutches,                Traffic                Looking down to
  sticks                               Teenagers              areas

118
                                      SOCIALISATION      ©

         SOCIALISING YOUR PUPPY
                TO PEOPLE
Of course, it’s really important that puppy feels
comfortable around other people, but at the other end
of the scale, it’s also really important that puppy doesn’t
run around the park body-slamming every stranger like
a hopeful toddler smacking a vending machine!
  Use your food wisely, young Jedi.
  Set up situations where puppy is around a wide variety
of passive people, and if treats are being introduced to
the environment, let them come from you. Puppy still
gets to make the association that good things happen in
the presence of other people, but retains a focus on you to
ensure they're not pawing or jumping at total strangers
in the hope of hitting the jackpot.


           THINK BEFORE YOU DO
So, you have a starter list to work on, but before you
dive in, remember: socialisation is a process, not an event.
Everything you do with your puppy at this stage should
be an investment in your bond together. Puppy needs
to trust that you won’t put them in a scary situation
and if things do get a little heavy, then they need to
have faith that you'll look after them, that you’ve got
their back at all times. That will build a sense of security

                                                             ite)
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
and confidence - we’re all happier exploring if we know
we've got a good teammate at our side to get us out of
bother if needs be.
  If you’re going on an outing with puppy to the retail
park or to hang around the school gates, don’t be in
a hurry to get too close too soon. Great exposure can
be done at a good safe distance. Just let puppy watch
and observe, let them hear the sounds and sniff the
smells without too much pressure or intensity. You’re
far better starting at a good, safe distance and gradually
decreasing the distance as confidence grows, than you
are staying up too close, puppy having a bad experience
and you then having to make a retreat. That'll put a
cross in the box which may take another 20 repetitions
to overcome.
   One final word before you zoom off to the park or
garden centre: it is very important to remember this one
word - choice. For all of us in new situations, choice is
very important. If |was in a room on my own and saw
a strange package on the floor, I’m going to be far more
confident going forward to explore it if I know that at
any time I can have the choice to back away. If, on the
other hand, as I approach the package I hear the only
exit door slam behind me, then I’m going to be more
alert and wary, knowing that I have no means of escape
if it all gets a little scary.
   This lack of an ‘escape’ route will slow down my
120
                                   SOCIALISATION
exploration. In puppy terms, this lack of choice will
slow down their willingness to explore, which in turn
will slow down the socialisation process and, remember,
time is of the essence.
   How then, can we let puppy know they have a choice?
  As muchas possible and where safe, avoid having a tight
lead or any obvious restrictions on puppy’s movements
when exploring new environments and things. You can
have a long thin line from the puppy’s harness to ensure
they feel no restraint or restriction. That way they can
move at their own pace, slow down, stop or even back
away if need be.
   To complement this sense of choice, your own very
important role here is to always be there for puppy, at
their side as they explore. Feel free to drop a treat for
puppy if they glance up to you or just to help them
overcome a proverbial ‘speed-bump’ with a new object.
Your job is to make the experience pleasurable and to
give good associations to this mad world full of crazy
new things which we're now introducing them to.
However, don’t flood puppy with too many treats; we
want them to have a decent awareness of the
environment    around   them, to take time to watch,
listen and soak it all in. If we’re bombarding them with
a relentless supply of food then they may be so focused
on the taste, smell and movement of the treats that
they don’t get the full benefit afforded to them to

                                                      121
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SOQUEEZY
explore and absorb the world around them. Having
said that, it is very helpful to use the food to make
good associations, to reinforce any great behaviours
you want more of in the future and to make each
outing as pleasurable and beneficial as possible.
  So, on the way home, get yourself an ice cream, you
deserve a little reinforcement, too!
  The two main tools we’re using here to get the most
from our socialisation window and to help build a
secure and optimistic puppy are ‘Desensitisation’ and
‘Building a Positive Association’.


               DESENSITISATION
Desensitisation   is when we    expose   puppy   to a new
thing or environment at a nice, safe distance so
they don’t feel overwhelmed, scared or overexcited.
As long as puppy remains unconcerned by the new
thing or environment, proximity can be decreased
and intensity can be increased to the point where the
puppy continues to remain totally unaffected by the
exposure. The result of desensitisation means that
puppy has no particular emotional response one way
or the other to the new thing or environment, it’s just
‘part of the furniture’. Traffic? Big deal. Bicycles? Like,
whatever, dude.
  As always, the better you are at observing and

122
                                 SOCIALISATION eq,
reading your puppy’s body language, the better your
training and interactions are going to be. The trick
with desensitisation is that you don’t try and rush it.
Always look to be working at an intensity that is
sufficiently low to ensure puppy is relaxed (what
we sometimes refer to in dog training as ‘below
threshold’). To do this, it’s time to pop your ‘Body
Language Expert’ hat on. If you see any of the signs
below, then puppy may be under a little too much
pressure and it may be time for you to consolidate or
back off a little:

 ® Lip licking - pups may lick their lips in a
   ‘tongue flick out the front of the mouth’ style if
   under pressure

 a’ Wide eyes, dilated pupils

 w Excessive panting

 w Tail tucked

   Furrowed brow

 % Crouched back

 @ One paw raised

 & Vocalising

 ‘’ Staring at the stimulus and not blinking


                                                    123
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
 % Turning away from the stimulus and
   deliberately not looking

 ‘” Hiding behind your legs

As I said earlier, the above signs of body language only
become valuable communication when you listen and
respond to them.

  1. Don’t put your puppy under pressure.

  2. Take your time, relieve the pressure, move away.

  3. The next time you're in a similar environment
      with puppy, make sure you initially stay at a
      sufficiently ‘safe’ distance (‘safety’ is in the eye
      of the beholder, so study pup’s body language),
      and begin building a positive association as
      described below...



             BUILDING A POSITIVE
                 ASSOCIATION
Building a positive association - or ‘conditioning’ your
puppy to like something - has many benefits: it helps
puppy feel good about particular situations, it makes
your life less stressful and it makes others’ lives easier,
too. This tool simply means we ‘pair’ an item or event

124
                                        SOCIALISATION (eR
with something that puppy loves, in order to help them
feel positive when presented with a similar situation in
the future.
   For example: over the next few years, you’re definitely
going to be taking your puppy to the vets for check-ups.
   You can do it the hard way, or the easy way!
   If I were you, I’d call in to the vets tomorrow and ask if
it’s okay if you pop in every now and then over the next
couple of weeks to give puppy a few treats. If they say,
‘Yes’, then cool, crack on.
   If they say, ‘No’, also cool, just find another vet and
take your business elsewhere.
   When you do call in with puppy, make sure you pop
your head around the door first without puppy to check
there’s no potentially scary animals (or people!) in the
waiting room, or youll end up conditioning completely
the wrong emotional response!
   Get to the entrance of the vets, then as soon as you go
in the door treat, treat, treat, treat, treat; have a little party
for a few seconds ... then go outside again.
  No treats outside, you want puppy to associate the ‘good
stuff with being in the vet’s building.
  Wait a few moments, then head back in again with
puppy and as soon as you're in there again, treat,
treat, treat...
  Once you've done this a few times, you'll notice that
puppy is keen to go in again. Keep it short and sweet in

                                                               125
re       EASY’ PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY

the first instance, and then as you progress you can stay
in the building a little longer and spread the duration
between treats out a little more so puppy has longer to
take in the environment - the sight of the receptionists,
the smells of the meds and disinfectant, the sound of
the telephone, the texture of the tiled floor, etc.
   Youllstart to notice that as soon as you are approaching
the building, puppy has a waggy tail and expectant
eyes - they are looking for and anticipating the good
stuff. Excellent, a positive association to the vets has been
formed. (N.B. if you have any concerns regarding having
your unvaccinated puppy on the vets’ floor, just carry
pup and go through the same conditioning process,
that’s no problem at all.)
   For each repetition, as long as puppy maintains a
happy outlook, desensitise and positively condition
more and more of the situations that will be occurring
in the future, such as a vet nurse touching puppy’s ear,
then treat. Vet nurse holds puppy’s tail, then treat. This
puppy is going to love being handled by people in the
vets’ surgery. Thank Dog!
  Using the same process, create a positive association
to these situations to build an optimistic puppy:

      ®% Going in the den
         Going to new places
      ‘~ Groomers

126
                                     SOCIALISATION
  ®   Vets

  ‘’ Bath time
  @   Nail clipping
  @   Brushing
  w Flea treatment
  ‘’ ~Puppy school
  @   Going in the car
  a   Visitors to the house
  %” Meeting new people


Keep your thinking cap on and be proactive. For any
situation you want puppy to feel comfortable and
confident in, wisely invest your time (and treats!) in
building that positive association. Believe me, a pinch
of precaution is so much better than a ton of rehab,
scratches, crying and fear!


         COUNTER-CONDITIONING
Counter-conditioning is when we pair something
fantastic, like treats, with a situation puppy has previously
felt uncomfortable with; for example, puppy has
previously been scared when they heard your landline
ring. The counter-conditioning process would be: turn

                                                          127
re    EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

the volume down, ring the telephone and as soon as
it rings, give puppy a treat. Repeat several times and
if successful over time, you’ll see evidence of a +CER
(‘Positive Conditioned Emotional Response’, see page
222) as they wag their tail and look expectantly to you
when the phone rings.


                  FEAR PERIODS
As a footnote to the socialisation timetable mentioned
above, puppies will often go through what’s known as
a ‘Fear Period’ between 8-12 weeks of age. In nature,
it makes sense for this developmental stage to kick
in at around this time. At two months of age the
puppies have spent the majority of their lives being
super-curious little turbo dogs, which enables them
to get as much information from the world in as
little time as possible. By eight weeks, Mum will be
pretty exhausted, so Mother Nature uploads her own
‘emergency software’ to keep the puppies safe. What
was just so recently curiosity now turns into sensitivity,
caution or even fear.
  Now, when the Fear Period takes hold, should puppy
run into any situation that’s abnormal, then rather
than bounding over to investigate like they would’ve
previously done and/or rely on Mum to get them out of
bother, they quick-aboutturn and look to run back to

128
                                      SOCIALISATION @@
safety. The Fear Period acts like an invisible umbilical-
bungee-chord that stops puppy from skipping over to
the Big Bad Wolf to say ‘Hi!’ Most pups will do this to a
greater or lesser degree, so be aware that during the age
of two to three months you may well notice puppy being
a little more cautious, a little more sensitive in situations.
Sometimes they will bark. It is crucial that during this
period you DO NOT PUNISH the barking. Puppy is
super-sensitive, so in turn you need to be super-sensitive
to puppy's needs and intense development. Just think
about it - if you punish puppy when they’re fearful, you
are simply making the whole experience worse. When
you make the experience worse, you will teach puppy
that, When in this environment, bad things happen. That’s
essentially the opposite of what we want to teach!
      If puppy seems fearful, be considerate:
 % Increase the distance.

     Work at a distance that helps pup’s body
     language change from fearful to relaxed.

 @ Don’t punish. That will only confirm to puppy
   that they were right to feel fearful!

 ‘’ Think: can you use food next time at a
    reasonable distance to help counter-condition?

 ’’ Can you create a similar but less intense version
    of the scenario in the future to help desensitise?

                                                          129
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

Throughout the Fear Period, continue with considerate,
sympathetic socialisation and watch that body language
like a hawk. If pup needs more space, pup needs more
space — provide it.
  Youll get through this together, you’re a team.




130
                    i iEN Us           a

               DOG PARK
              ETIQUETTE


            ‘It’s not just a stroll in the park.

       icture the scene: the sun's shining and you're out
       with your new puppy, the pair of you are strolling
along, checking    in and   smiling   to each   other.   Heck,
even the lead between       you is ‘smiling’, it's so. relaxed
and slack. You enter the park and when you're safely in
and have checked that there are no other dogs around,
you ask little ‘un to sit, you unclip the lead, good puppy
stays seated and looks to you for the ‘release’. ‘Off you
go!’ you say and as you do puppy trots a few metres
away    for a little exploration and a sniff as you begin
your walk. As soon as pup sees you walking on, they
happily bounce     up to you and the pair of you stroll
away together, constantly checking in with each other.

                                                            131
re    EASY PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY

  Then you spot another dog and owner a hundred
metres away, so you crouch down and call pup to you,
who enthusiastically runs and nestles their shoulders
and butt into you for a cuddle so you can clip the lead
onto their harness prior to giving them a treat.
  You continue your walk together until you’re 20
metres or so away from the other owner and dog, you
then ask, ‘Is it okay for my puppy to say hello? Will your
dog be comfortable with that?’ The other owner says,
‘Sure, he’s good with puppies’, then you slowly wander
over and the two dogs politely sniff each other’s butts,
say ‘Hello’. Then after a while pup looks to you, you say,
‘Thank you’ to the other owner and ‘Let’s go’ to your
pup and give them a treat as you walk away to continue
your lovely walk together.
  Ha! Well, we can all dream, can’t we?!
  Okay, here’s an alternative scenario...
  Picture the scene: the sun’s shining and you’re out
with your puppy, you've only got 15 minutes to get this
done as you've got to pick up the kids. You’ve not been
to this field before, so you stress about where to park
and all the time puppy’s been whining and barking in
the back of the car. When you finally find a place to
park, you grab pup from the back of the car, put the lead
on and quickly walk to where all the action is!
  Puppy stops to sniff but time is precious so you
encourage puppy to carry on walking, he had a wee

132
                             DOG PARK ETIQUETTE 9&
before you left home anyway! As you get into the main
area of the park, you spot a few dogs on their leads at a
safe distance so you unclip puppy’s lead and go about
your walk. As you approach one of the on-lead dogs,
puppy starts running towards them, you’re not sure
so you say ‘Come!’, but pup says ‘No!’ and carries on
bounding towards the unknown dog.
   ‘Can you call your pup back, please?’ says the owner at
a distance. ‘It’s okay, he’s friendly,’ you shout, but deep
down you know ... that’s not the point, is it?
  As pup gets to the other dog, they’re instantly flattened
and growled at by the adult dog. You run to catch up
and arrive just in time to hear puppy scream in fear as
another big paw slams into their spine.
  What do you say to the owner? What can you say?
   It’s all a bit too late. Their dog was on the lead, your
pup was offlead, your pup ran up to them and had no
recall. You’re so upset that you put puppy back on-lead
and you march back to the car. On the way back, the
lead goes tight as pup tries to squat to go to the toilet.
Perfect, you’ve got no poo bags!
  Tomorrow, you go to put puppy in the car for another
trip to the park. Guess what? Puppy is now afraid to
get into the car because they think, Yesterday when this
sequence of events happened it led to a very frightening and
painful experience.


                                                         133
WY casy PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY
  Example    One   may be a Canine        Holy Grail and
Example Two, well, | wouldn’t wish that on my worst
enemy, but how can we aim to get more of the first and
less of the second? Well, first of all, you need to PLAN.
Failure to plan is planning to fail your pup.
   Research shows that we are more likely to remember
negative events than neutral or even positive events.
From a survival and evolutionary perspective, that makes
sense but, as a new puppy owner, it really emphasises that
we want to avoid as much as possible the opportunity
for puppy to have a bad experience with another dog,
child or stranger. One bad experience could really
make an unfortunately large withdrawal from puppy’s
‘confidence account’.
  The most important thing we can do as new owners is
to build a happy, confident and optimistic puppy. If we
have an optimistic puppy that always looks for the good
in an environment or situation, then our life with our
pup will be so much more relaxed and fun.
  So, where do you start? Well, you wouldn’t book a
party without checking out the venue first. You wouldn’t
send your child to a school without visiting the school
to get a feel for it, find out that it’s safe, has no bullies
and is a nice, positive environment for learning. Well,
your local park also has the potential to be a pretty huge
learning establishment for your puppy - don’t let it be
the school of hard knocks! So, do a recce!

134
                            DOG PARKETIQUETTE
   Head out on a fact-finding mission - without pup - to
discover appropriate walking, playing and socialisation
areas. Here’s a few points to consider:
 a If you are driving to the area, is there plenty of
   safe space to be able to ‘unload’ puppy from the
   car without being ambushed or overwhelmed by
   dogs and people?                                   |
 2   If you are walking to the area, is it close enough?
     While puppy is growing they should have a
     limit on the amount of walking to ensure that
     physically they’re not over-stretched. We also
     don’t want pup to be tired by the time they
     arrive at the park. Tired dogs can be grumpy
     dogs and we want each visit to be fun and safe.

     Does the layout of the area allow for puppy to
     be able to watch and ‘take in’ all the new sights
     and sounds at a safe distance? It’s important
     puppy can experience this new world at their
     own pace. Too small an area or too close to the
     new stimuli (dogs, kids, people, bikes, etc) may
     lead to panic and negative associations.

     Do you get a vibe that the park has sensible,
     appropriate dogs (and owners!)? What we’re
     looking for here is nice, gentle and relaxed dogs.
     You don’t want to be seeing high-octane chase

                                                           135
rf      EASY PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY

       games everywhere and too much rough and
       tumble from the other dogs.

 % Are there some nice quiet areas away from the
   ‘main drag’ where you'll be able to sit with
   puppy for quiet time, perhaps for a Rucksack
   Session (a what? See later in Chapter 18) or just
   to watch the world go by and to avoid being
       overwhelmed.

 ” Is there a more appropriate time to visit? Some
       parks are quieter at certain times of the day.
       Initially these quiet times may be the best to
       visit so puppy can get used to the environment
       first then, once settled, you can ‘upgrade’ to
       the busier periods.


So, you've done the recce, and you’ve decided on the
timing and location of your first outing. Question is,
what do you take?


      RECOMMENDED             KIT FOR OUTINGS
Poo bags: one of the basics! I’d rather you forget to bring
your puppy than your poo bags. There’s an old military
survival mantra: “Two is one, one is none’. Bring at least
three to avoid the, ‘Oh, you’re kidding me, AGAIN?!’
moment.


136
                             DOG PARK ETIQUETTE

Treats: don’t turn up to a gun fight with a knife. Bring
the BEST treats you possibly can for your outings
with puppy. We’re using the treats here for two
major investments: to give a good association to the
new environments you're introducing puppy to and
to deliver a great consequence to the behaviours we
want more of. Every day’s a school day and we never
want to miss opportunities to heavily reinforce the
behaviours we want more of. The behaviours you’re
reinforcing here may be the behaviours you’ve asked
for such as a nice recall or a sit, or it may be a behaviour
that you spot puppy doing and you'd like to see that
repeated in the future, such as toileting outside or
checking in with you as you walk together. If you love
it, reinforce it!


Treat pouch: not only is this a convenient way to carry
your treats, poo bags, etc, but it’s also a nice visual
signal for both you and your puppy to put your ‘game
faces’ on!

Long line: want to give puppy a little more ‘freedom’
to explore but don’t want to lose all contact? Sounds
sensible - get yourself a nice long line. Dependent on
the size of your puppy, a long line can be anything in
length between five and ten metres: too short and you'll
inadvertently make the line tight and uncomfortable;

                                                         137
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
too long (or too thick) and it'll be too heavy for puppy
to heave around the park!
   There are nice options on the market now. Get one
without a loop handle as you may evolve to just letting
the long line trail behind puppy rather than holding
it yourself all the time. You won’t want a handle that
could potentially get caught on sticks, etc. And note,
a long line is not a retractable line, this is just a long,
single piece of material.
   If you live in an area that has plenty of rainfall, consider
a biothane line as they don’t absorb extra water, and
therefore don’t absorb extra weight!
   Important note: a long line is not designed to replace
good recall training. Also, do not use the long line to
pull puppy into you. That’s uncomfortable for them
and it won’t create a good positive association for puppy
coming to you. If you want puppy to come to you, then
you need to give them a positive reason to do that, and
this is where your perfect ‘Recall’ will come in - see later
in Chapter 15.
   If you do pull puppy on the long line, I will hunt you
down, I will find you and I will train you!


                   SET UP A DATE
Has puppy already met and got on well with another
dog elsewhere? If so, perhaps you could arrange to

138
                              DOG PARK ETIQUETTE a,
‘accidently’ bump into each other on the first one or two
visits to the park. The added familiarity and guaranteed
safe meeting will add to pup’s confidence and optimism
for return visits to the park. The knowledge of a safe
and friendly greeting will also add value to your own
personal experience of the dog walk.


               ASK FIRST. ALWAYS.
Better to seek permission than forgiveness. If you see another
owner with their dog at the park and you think the
dog may be an appropriate meet-and-greet for puppy,
please ask from a distance first. Never assume that all
other dogs will be happy with a puppy running up to
them - they won’t. The responsibility for your pup’s
experiences is on you, never the other dog and never
the other owner. As much as physically possible, ensure
all meetings are positive experiences; if in doubt, walk
away. There’ll be better opportunities later. Also, it’s
good practice for puppy to learn that not every single
dog is there to be greeted. We don’t want to set up
an expectation, and therefore a potential frustration,
in puppy that every single dog is a guaranteed meet-
and-ereet. If you constantly let puppy go up to every
dog they see, then in the future when such a meet
isn’t appropriate, puppy will start to get frustrated.
Frustration is the fuel behind a lot of unwanted

                                                           139
ro      EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

behaviours such as pulling, whining and barking. They
need to learn that sometimes other dogs say ‘Hello’,
sometimes they don’t. Just like us.
  Let’s say on average that initially you say “Hi’ to every
one in five dogs that you meet. That’s a sensible target
and will help avoid creating a ‘frustrated greeter’.


      AND FINALLY, SOME SIMPLE PARK
       ETIQUETTE RULES TO OBSERVE
       Pick up poop.

 ® If another dog is on the lead, there is a reason
       they are on a lead! I repeat: don’t let your puppy
       run up to other dogs unless you’ve asked if it’s
       okay to do so first.

 Re Not every dog wants to play with every other
       dog, no more than you want to lace daisies
       through the hair of every stranger you pass on
       the street! It’s not sufficient, responsible, safe
       or fair to shout, ‘It’s okay, he’s friendly!’ from
       200 metres. Why? We need to be considerate,
       not just to our own puppy, but also to everyone
       else at the park. Maybe the other dog doesn’t
       like other dogs. Maybe they’re afraid. Maybe
       the other owner is trying really hard to train
       their dog and can really do without the ‘puppy-

140
                        DOG PARK ETIQUETTE
ambush’ at this time! Maybe the other owner
is having a difficult time and really needs some
quiet moments alone with their thoughts
and their dog. Perhaps the other dog is old
or has an injury and really shouldn’t risk
being pounced upon or getting overexcited.
Remember, if the other dog is on a lead, there’s-
definitely a really good reason. Always ask first
before you are too close.

Every day’s a school day. Any time spent with
your pup, one of you is training the other
one! Reinforce what you love and don’t allow
unwanted behaviour to be practised.

Let puppy know you've ‘got their back’. Don’t
put puppy in a situation in which they may feel
scared. Trust in your relationship is everything.
You’re a team.

First impressions last, so make sure all initial
introductions are supervised and polite.

Tomorrow is another day. Don’t let play go on
too long, don’t let puppy become an adrenalin
junkie. We want the sight of other dogs
and going to the park to be associated with
enjoyment and relaxation, not an adrenaline-
fuelled rollercoaster!

                                                    141
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
  if Do not leave pups and dogs to ‘sort it out’. Your
      pup - your responsibility. One bad experience
      with another dog can shade your puppy’s whole
      life.

      If you’re watching your phone, you won’t know
      where your pup is, but if you’re watching your
      puppy, your phone will still be where you left it!
      Watch your puppy.




142
                  CEAiYreer LO

            PLAY-AWAY




       ‘Play is the highest form of research:
                  ALBERT EINSTEIN


     emember your childhood days?
        I bet your best friend wasn’t necessarily the kid
that commanded you do things for them or the one
that brought your school dinners to the table. I bet your
bestest friend, your BFF (one for the kids!), the one that
makes you smile when you think back to them was the
one you played with the most, the one you chased, the
one that chased you, the one you competed with most
often to ‘win’ the game.
  Play is the best.
  Play is ubiquitous in mammals, especially the young.

                                                       143
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
   It just makes us, and puppies, feel good.
   Play can develop the ability to improvise, the ability
to be social, the ability to deal with frustration and the
ability to develop impulse control. All great skills to
furnish puppy with to help them deal with unexpected
events later in life.
   I recently had to take someone to the emergency room
of a hospital and in the waiting room | watched several
sick and injured children play with the toys that were
provided. That’s how important play is.
  Now, you giving a toy to your puppy to play with on
their own gives me no more satisfaction that you telling
me that your puppy gets plenty of walks because you
leave the back door open!
   Play is at its most potent when it’s a social activity.
   Do not expect puppy to play on their own.
   I want you to play with puppy - the dividends for puppy
are huge and do you know what? You’re a mammal: the
science says youll love it too!
   So, a few ideas to think about...


      WHAT ACTUALLY IS PUPPY PLAY?
Believe it or not, when we’re playing with puppy, not only
are we helping them develop their social learning skills,
capacity to communicate, psychological robustness and a
good old-fashioned love of a game, we’re helping them to

144
                                         PLAY-AWAY (a
satisfy certain elements of their predatory motor pattern.
This is a phrase coined by ethologists (people that study
animals   in their natural environment)      to reflect the
‘wiring’ inside all dogs that we've either emphasised or
supressed through selective breeding, initially for the
working and sporting ability of chosen breeds. For
example, terriers were bred so they loved to shake-kill
their quarry; collies love to eyestalk their flock/prey, and
beagles will follow their nose.
  When       performed,      these    selected    behaviours
intrinsically feel so good to the dog that they want to
do more; the more they do, the better they get at them
and so the big wheel keeps on turning, generation to
generation. The full predatory motor pattern is below:

  Track - Eye/Stalk - Chase - Grab/Bite - Shake/
  Kill-Bite - Dissect - Eat

Back in the day, imagine our archetypal wild dog who
had to make their own living, catch their own protein
and provide their own energy source. They needed to
feel pretty good about practising all of the elements
of the predatory motor pattern, so they could become
proficient and effective when the time came. Failure to
catch their own protein and energy source would have
resulted in the failure of the individual and, ultimately,
the failure of the species.

                                                         145
rf    EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

  So that’s why they like Frisbees!
  Let’s break that list down into its component parts:
Tracking: imagine the dog wandering around the woods
whistling to themselves when all of a sudden BOOM,
that sweet aroma of a rabbit’s footprint caresses the dog’s
nostrils. Dinner bell. Our dog needs to follow footprint
by-footprint in order to find the source.

Eye/Stalk: our dog has now followed their nose up to
the point where they've spotted the rabbit with their
own eyes. No need to follow the nose from hereon,
the hunting baton gets handed over to the eyes. The
challenge here is to creep and slink up to the rabbit
to get as close as energy-efficiently as possible, without
being detected by the quarry.

Chase: this is when Brer Rabbit looks up, spots the dog
and says, ‘Uh, oh!’ Pow! Bunny runs for their life. Pow!
Hungry dog gives chase.

Grab/Bite: if the chase is successful then the dog bites
down, grabs the rabbit and holds on for dear life.

Shake/Kill: if the grab bite is successful, then the dog
shakes their prey.

Dissect: if the kill is successful, then the dog dissects the
prey.

146
                                       PLAY-AWAY 9
Eat: the predatory wiring has done its job.

Certain breeds and individuals may have a penchant
for various elements of that sequence, but it’s not
guaranteed. Like us, all pups are different. Some of us
love nightclubs, some of us can think of nothing worse
and that’s just fine. Learn to develop play in the way
that you and your puppy enjoy the most. I’ll describe
a few different play strategies later. The key point to
remember is to play the games they love.

On top of the predatory role-play above, your sessions
will deliver:

 ’ Bonding
 @   Fun

     Physical outlet
 ” Mental outlet

 %   Positive associations with you

     Positive associations to the environment you’re
     playing in
 ‘” A new ‘currency’ to use as positive reinforcement
    to exchange for the behaviours you want more of

 # The opportunity to interact with each other in
   playful, zero-pressure way, which is priceless

                                                        147
ro EASY PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY

What follows are a few options of play to try out. Try
them all on for size and eventually the wand will choose
the wizard! Before'you do, though, get down on your
knees and ‘prey’!
  During play, meet puppies at their own level. Not
just from a height perspective, but concentrate on
playing with no more strength, speed or activity level
than a sibling puppy of the same age would assert.
Hold toys with fingertips, not a white-knuckled fist!
As far as strategy is concerned, I love being the Useful
Idiot in all games, constantly losing my grip of the toy,
‘Arghhh, I’m so weak, you’re so strong!’ as I sprawl
and get dragged along the ground by puppy’s sheer
superhero power!
  Do you know why? Because that builds confidence
and joy in puppy.
  We want to build a love of the game because guess
what? You’re the source of the game.
  Who’s the superhero now?

                          Tug
Ever been told, ‘You shouldn’t play tug with your puppy’?
Or if you really must, then:
  ‘You should never let puppy win a game of tug with
you?
  Be honest, I bet the person that told you that was
pretty boring, eh? Probably not the kind of person you’d

148
                                        PLAY-AWAY (aq
want to play with anyway! From puppy’s perspective, why
would they want to play a game that they’re never going
to win? I’m sure your ego is strong enough that you’re
happy to let puppy ‘win’ plenty of times. Imagine being
so insecure that you must defeat the puppy opposition
at all costs, like some nervy Conan the Barbarian!

Tips on playing tug with your puppy:
 %
     Do it, but be sensible. You’re playing with a
     baby puppy, not a grizzly bear!

     Keep your own body soft, relaxed and
     compromising to puppy's movements.

     Keep arousal low.

     When arousal gets too high, it limits the ability
     of puppy to listen. The emphasis shifts from
     social fun and starts heading towards a more
     selfish possession and ‘killing’ motivation.
     That’s not so constructive and adds nothing
     positive to your relationship.

     Play needs to remain a team game.

     If puppy starts to shake the toy, bites your hands
     or their pupils get a little dilated then stop the
     game for a while to allow arousal levels to come
     down.

                                                          149
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY

If puppy quickly becomes aroused during games of tug,
try these tips:

 ” Only hold the toy by your fingertips; this ensures
   that not too much tension is put on the ‘tug’.

 *’ As soon as puppy ‘wins’ the toy, encourage
                         ¢   .   )




    them back to you to re-engage. Make sure the
    fun is focused on the game rather than the
      possession.

 ” Make sure that when you’re both holding the
   toy, your hand movements are low and gently
   moving from side to side.

      Avoid jagged movements with your hands.

 ‘a’ Ensure puppy's feet are always in contact with
     the ground and not ‘dangling’ in the air. Lifting
     the pup will encourage a more determined
     and desperate bite, plus it puts far too much
     unwanted pressure on those delicate puppy
     teeth. (I know they don’t feel delicate when they
     nip you on the nose, but they are!)

 ® Keep doing lots of swaps of treats for the toy
      (see ‘Safe Swaps’ on page 223). This will prevent
      the game from hitting too high a crescendo,
      plus it will be a nice foundation for later ‘Safe
      Swaps’ training.

150
                                        PLAY-AWAY eq
 % Keep sessions short and taper the arousal level
   down a few notches towards the end of each
    session rather than coming to an emergency
    stop. A lot of trainers will tell you to ‘end ona
    high’. There’s a big difference between ending
    ona ‘high’ and ending on a good note. End on
    the latter: don’t abruptly leave a ‘high’ puppy
    twiddling their thumbs!

                    What Hand?
Not all play has to be Chasey, Grabby, Killy and Bitey!
(The four evil dwarves they never tell you about!) A
nice, simple and rewarding exercise is “What Hand?’ It
engages puppy’s nose and is a lovely way for puppy to
learn that not all play has to be at 1OOmph.

  1. Much like a favourite uncle, sit on the floor and
    put your two hands behind your back.

  2. Place a tasty treat or two in one hand, leaving
     the other hand empty.

 3. Bring your two closed fists around to your front
    and let puppy sniff each hand.

 4. When puppy ‘decides’ where the goodies are
    by concentrating their attention on the correct
    hand, simply say, “Good! and open your hand
    to give puppy their prize.

                                                         151
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY
This is a nice simple exercise for puppy to enjoy some
focused nose-work, but it can also offer a relaxed gateway
exercise to introduce children to puppy and vice versa.
Relaxed, focused and rewarding. If you want to add a
bit more energy to the action, when puppy indicates the
correct hand, you can flick the treat along the floor for
puppy to chase (see, all roads lead back to back to the
old predatory motor pattern: chase and grab the treat /
chase and grab the squirrel). The bonus here is that as
soon as puppy has grabbed and eaten their treat, their
next step will be to look and run back to you for another
repetition. Puppy automatically running back and
checking in with you is going to be a great foundation
for future ‘Eye Contact’ and also ‘Recall’ training (see
pages 175 and 197).


           PLAY AS A REINFORCER
In addition to food, you now have another currency to
exchange for the behaviours you love from pup. You
can reinforce puppy automatically running back to you
down the park with a great game of tug or have a quiet
game of ‘What Hand?’ as you wait in the vets for puppy’s
health check.
  Ten minutes of play with your puppy will bring you to
a wonderful place that adults rarely get to visit nowadays.
And remember, for best results, play with sincerity.

152
                             ‘ee

                       oe,
                        A,   Wn    &




                  CEPR                 TEsR a I

          JUMPING UP



             JUMPING UP - WHY?
So exactly why do puppies jump up at people? Because
they luuurve you! Let’s start with a statement of fact:
jumping up is a normal behaviour in puppies. It’s a
natural (and usually reinforced) behaviour for puppy to
jump up to the face of their mother to gain attention.
Puppies will also naturally target their focus onto
Mum’s face to lick the commissure (a swanky term for
‘corners’) of her mouth, which in turn stimulates her
to regurgitate food which puppy then eats. Yum. Enjoy
your breakfast! It’s therefore a natural progression for
puppy to jump up at humans who are their new family
in search of further attention and reinforcement. The
motivation behind jumping up is perfectly normal and

                                                     153
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY

natural - we just give it a longer tail by deliberately or
inadvertently reinforcing that behaviour.


                    THE ISSUE
  1. Not everyone appreciates dirty paw prints all
     over their new outfit just as they’re about to
     head out to the wedding! Who knew’!

  2. Some people may be frightened by a dog
     jumping up at them.

  3. Some children may be inadvertently hurt by
     puppy's claws if they’re allowed to jump up on
     them.


       THE PERSISTENT OFFENDER
As we've seen above, jumping up is a natural behaviour
which is reinforced by puppys mum. However,
puppy is no longer with their mum, therefore it’s no
longer being reinforced, so why does the jumping up
persist? Maybe, just maybe, the behaviour is still being
reinforced?
  If puppy jumps up and you (or anyone for that
matter) gives puppy some much desired attention, then
the behaviour has been reinforced. Behaviour that gets
reinforced is more likely to be repeated in the future.

154
                                       JUMPING UP @
This is a perfect example of the value of consistency in
dog training. So, you and your family need to decide
here and now on one of the two options below:

  1. We do not want puppy to jump on anybody.

  2. We want puppy to jump on everybody
     (including babies, pensioners, police officers,
     etc).



        LET’S FIX THIS - MUTUALLY
         EXCLUSIVE BEHAVIOURS
Our job here is to manage the environment so puppy
doesn’t get reinforced for the now unwanted behaviour
and to heavily reinforce a new, alternative behaviour.
We'll refer to that new, alternative behaviour as an
MEB: ‘Mutually Exclusive Behaviour’. If puppy is doing
a Mutually Exclusive Behaviour then they cannot be
doing the unwanted behaviour at the same time. For
example, if puppy is sitting, then they cannot be jumping
up (English Bull Terriers try, but to no avail!). In all of
your future problem-solving, you'll be using MEBs a lot.
It’s like Kryptonite to unwanted behaviours!
   Let me expand on this idea of MEBs. Don’t want your
dog to bark with excitement when you get home? Cool,
teach them you'll only say hello when they’re holding

                                                        155
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
their favourite teddy (They can’t bark and hold their
teddy at the same time). Don’t want your dog to pull on
the lead to go over ahd play with their doggy pals? Okay,
teach them that only when they give you eye contact will
you say, ‘Go play’ and take them over for the meet-and-
greet. They can’t look at you and pull at the same time.
Perfect MEB.
   So, let me be clear: we’re not going to punish puppy
for jumping up, that’s ridiculous. Punishment won't
teach puppy what to do. It'll put you in a bad mood and
it ll scare puppy. Not good.

                 First Things First
Control and management (if you need a refresher, please
see ‘Control and Management is Your Best Friend’, page
22). I’m the first to admit this, but sometimes we just
don’t have our “Puppy Training’ head on. Imagine the
scene: youve had a hell of a day at work, you’re on your
last reserves of energy and patience and the doorbell
goes. Your grandparents have popped around for five
minutes.
  You are midway through your ‘no jumping up’ training
but puppy’s not yet prepped to politely say ‘Hi’ to two
equally excitable (and in this case, elderly) visitors.
Especially two visitors who have previously been asked
not to encourage and fuss puppy when he jumps up at
them but merely replied, ‘Oh, it’s okay, we love puppies!’

156
                                         JUMPING UP
  Don’t beat yourself up and don’t set yourself (or puppy)
up for failure. Do yourself a favour, pop puppy in the
kitchen or garden with a nice stuffed Kong, answer the
door and then go back to puppy in a few minutes. After
the dust has settled, puppy can say hello to them on the
lead (that’s puppy on the lead, not the grandparents.
Although...?) or through the child-gate to accommodate
that initial, “OH MY GOD, HUUUMANS!’ outburst.
  Here’s the deal: your target, as ever, was to not let puppy
practise and be reinforced for the unwanted behaviour.
Mission accomplished.

      The Mutually Exclusive Behaviour
The trick here is to teach puppy what behaviour pays the
dividends. What behaviour gives access to the desired
goal?
   I like ‘Sit’.
   Sit is a great Mutually Exclusive Behaviour to combat
‘Jumping Up’.
   Sit tends to be a behaviour that gets practised a lot, so
let’s use it to everyone’s advantage to get puppy what they
want. As always, if there is a behaviour we don’t want,
then we have to tell puppy what we do want instead.
   Another approach with the same goal in mind would
be to teach puppy that the doorbell = treats in their den.
With enough repetition, puppy will hear the doorbell
and rather than running to the front door, they'll run

                                                          157
ro    EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

to their den. This exercise will also help with avoiding
over-arousal when visitors arrive.



       WHAT TO DO WHEN A PUPPY
            JUMPS AT YOU
None of us are perfect. Good control and management
is there to make it impossible for puppy to practise the
unwanted behaviour, but you know what, sometimes we
slip up. Sometimes we may forget and let the visitor into
the kitchen before we’ve popped puppy on the lead or
in the garden.
  So, in comes Mrs Visitor.
  You look at puppy, you look at Mrs Visitor, you strike
a Macaulay Culkin ‘Hands-to-Face’ pose ...
  Don’t stress it.
  If puppy runs and jumps up at Mrs Visitor, just ask her
to stand still and ignore puppy. The important message
here is that WE DO NOT REINFORCE JUMPING UP.
  Wait.
  Give it four to five seconds, if you’ve started your
Automatic Sit training then we may be lucky enough
that puppy has an “Ah-ha!’ moment and plants their
butt. If so, awesome,   immediately ask Mrs Visitor to
crouch down and give little ’un a good fuss. If four to
five seconds pass and puppy doesn’t plant their butt,
then ask puppy to sit and reinforce with a treat as above.

158
                                        JUMPING UP @
  If puppy just can’t sit due to the excitement of the
situation, c’est la vie, tomorrow's another day. Take
puppy outside for a moment, pop the lead on, then
come back in and greet Mrs Visitor with the control
you desire. Even if it means you come back in with a
few treats and lure puppy into a sit before Mrs Visitor
crouches down to say, ‘Howdy Doody’.
  Next time, improve your control and management; if
needs be, put a big yellow ‘C+M’ Post-It note on your
front door as a reminder!


        Avoid Any Telling Off, Shouting
               or Reprimanding
Picture the scene: imagine you walked into an appoint
ment with someone and as you went to shake their hand
they screamed ‘No!’ at you. Imagine you tried one more
time and all they did was fold their arms and shout ‘No!’
louder. Not only would you be confused, inhibited and
a little frightened, but you'll also be none the wiser as to
what greeting you should’ve given.
  Alternatively, imagine you enter the room and as you
approach the person to shake their hand, they lift theirs
and say, ‘High Five’; you can then high five them (get
you, hipster!). You'll get reinforced by having a nice
greeting and then crack on with your appointment.
  A high five might not have been the most natural way
for you to say hello, but it did the trick, you still like

                                                         159
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
the person you greeted and you'll know exactly what
behaviour to do next time.
  Win!

               PUPPIES WITH
          ‘ANTS-IN-THEIR-PANTS’!
The sit, as explained above, is an awesome solution for
the ‘Serial Jumper’ but some pups are just too darn
fidgety to be able to plant their butt for more than a
millisecond! If this is your little pup, then you need to
teach this puppy an awesome ‘Nose Target’ (see page
209) - nose target is such a good trick to have up your
sleeve that we will use it in other areas of your training
and it will be referred to in its own chapter later in this
book). Nose target is not only a great MEB to combat
jumping up but it also helps the puppy (and owner) to
be a little more proactive in getting the behaviours from
each other that each so desire. So, for example: come
in the door, as puppy heads towards you like a freight
train, put out your hand out as you'll learn later in this
book, give your cue “Touch’ and heavily reward with
both a treat and the attention puppy craves. Everyone’s
a winner, baby!




160
                                        JUMPING UP A

      WHAT DOES THE DOORBELL
     PREDICT? ‘DING DONG PUPPY’S
           GETTING HIGH...’
Sometimes, puppies become so excited because they
associate the doorbell with super-exciting visitors. This
can make training very difficult and sometimes
frustrating. Let’s make it a more even playing field. Let’s
change the association of what the doorbell actually
means to puppy.
  The plan: relax in a comfy chair with puppy in the
room with you. Have your training partner outside and,
when planned, have them ring the doorbell, ‘Ding-
Dong’. As soon as the bell sounds, puppy may well get
excited, but you’re just going to get out of your chair
and silently walk to the back of the house and drop a
few tasty treats into puppy’s bed. Pup will look at you,
then the door, then you again and eventually head to
their bed to get the treats.
  Repeat several times per session. You youngsters can
use your mobile phones to communicate with your Bell
Ringing Helper to instruct the next Ding Dong (in the
olden days, I used to have to send a fax, training sessions
took years!).
  With enough repetition, when the bell sounds, puppy
will get up and go to the back of the house rather than
the front door. This is conditioning at its finest and

                                                        161
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
shows how to change the association and the emotional
response to the sound of the doorbell.
  Start stretching the duration between the cue (Ding
Dong) and the treats at the back of the house - this
is known as the ‘Latency’. Just take your time getting
out of your chair and slowly head towards the treat
delivery area at the back of the house. This will help
puppy replace the old doorbell reactivity with a fresh
new impulse control and patience.
  Now you can start adding distraction: ‘Ding Dong’ =
 pup goes to back of house = you go open / close the
door = you go to back of house and treat puppy.
   Evolve your training to the final picture which is
Ding Dong = pup goes to back of house = you open the
door and let Visitor in = call puppy to you = get a sit =
reinforce puppy = High Five your new Visitor and tell
them, ‘Oh, pup’s very good, yes, they've never jumped
up at anyone!’


: 1 CASE STUDY: Meet Big Dave!
  Big Dave is a Bernese mountain dog. For those of
  you that don’t know what a Bernese mountain dog
  looks like, imagine a cross between a Glam Rocker
  and an Oil Tanker. Huuuuge!
    Bigger dog = bigger potential issue!


162
                                    JUMPING UP

  Big Dave lives with my friends Martin, Kaye and
their two boys, and as a youngster he was perfect in
every way. Almost. You guessed it, he was a serial
‘Jumper Upperer’.
  I think it was Oscar Wilde who said, “To have a
normal-size dog jump up at you can be a chore; to |
have a Bernese mountain dog jump up at you can
be a real pain in the butt’, so we had to address it
swiftly.
  The plan: turn Big Dave into a Sitting Boss.
  The family were all on board and they practised
Big Dave’s sits in as many different environments
as possible. Teaching inside and out, daytime
and night. Even changing the way the cue of ‘sit’
was delivered by the family member: sometimes
they were standing, sometimes seated. They even
sometimes delivered the cue of ‘sit’ with their
back to Big Dave to ensure that ‘sit’ meant ‘sit’, no
matter what else was going on around them.
  We reinforced the sit at every turn. When he
wanted to play chase for a toy, we only threw it
once his bum had hit the floor first. So, the sit
was being reinforced with a retrieve. When he was
out for a walk, he’d sit at a kerb before continuing
to enjoy his walk. Reinforcement is in the eye of


                                                   163
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

  the beholder; there are so many opportunities to
  reinforce the beKaviour you do want.
    Another thread of our remedy was to make
  sure initial greetings to Big Dave were kept fairly
  short, to prevent his excitement building too much
  momentum. For starters, family members and
  visitors crouched down to Big Dave to say ‘Hello’.
  Dave’s mum Kaye was initially and understandably
  standing upright, he was a big fella and very excited
  on greeting her, so her reaction was to stay away
  from the action. However, that just put his target
  up high. I got her to crouch down to Big Dave’s
  level, this was simple control and management.
  You can’t jump up at someone if they are at your
  level, because you have nowhere to jump. Big Dave
  was getting the attention he wanted but without
  jumping up, so the behaviour was not being
  repeated and reinforced. During greetings, treats
  were also given on the floor for Big Dave to pick up
  rather than being placed in his mouth to reinforce
  the sit, that way Big Dave’s overall focus was kept
  nice and low.
    As a sensible control and management tool,
  we also introduced a puppy pen in part of the
  kitchen that Big Dave could be placed in, just in


164
                                    JUMPING UP @&

case any unbriefed visitors came into the kitchen
(by ‘unbriefed’ I mean visitors that hadn’t yet been
told the ‘Greeting Protocol’, not naked visitors).
The puppy pen was also used immediately after a
particularly exciting greeting had been successfully
executed with a sit to say ‘Hi’. For example, visitor
comes into kitchen - Big Dave sits - low greeting
and chest rub delivered - handful of treats thrown
into pen area for Big Dave to shift focus and enjoy
without the risk of him reverting to ‘Zebedee-Dog’
and undoing his good work.
  Here’s another interesting observation of my
time spent with this particular Bernese. Big Dave
is a super-friendly dog and so strangers LOVED
rubbing the top of his head as they passed by. Now,
I appreciate it has been known for people to rub
the top of a dog’s head as they pass by but, I swear,
Big Dave was like a magnet for wannabe Popes
practising their blessings!
  I think part of Big Dave’s jumping up was to
counter this predicted head rub when people
approached him, his logic being if he could get
his head high up above their hands, then problem
solved, right?
  Martin and Kaye were brilliant and spotted Big


                                                       165
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

      Dave’s slight discomfort with being patted on the
      noggin’, so they learned to always intervene with a
      ‘Oh, he loves having his chest rubbed’, to avoid the
      strangers patting Big Dave’s head for good luck.
        Mutually exclusive behaviour, see? It’s not just
      for dogs!




166
                 ib    eP eek     i

             REFLEX TO
            NAME (RTN)

           WHAT DOES IT LOOK LIKE?
Each time you say puppy’      name,   they can’t resist
checking in with you.


   WHY TEACH A REFLEX TO NAME?
Believe me, there’s a lot of trouble puppy can get up
to - or in to - when they’re not checking in with you!
A ‘Reflex To Name’ (RTN) response from puppy can
act like ‘power steering’ to get puppy to focus on you,
without you having to resort to pulling on the lead or
other uncomfortable methods. Once trained, you can
use your new powers of RTN to get puppy’s attention
anytime.

                                                    167
ref EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
  Have a read of the ‘Reflex To Name’ training method
below, then grab yourself a cuppa, sit back and read
the Case Study at the end to enjoy the torment I went
through as I tried to teach the explosion that is Brian
Blessed how sometimes, less is more!


      REFLEX TO NAME: THE PUPPY
          STEPS OF TRAINING
The method that follows is different from some of the
other methods I’ve discussed because the delivery of the
treat is not contingent initially on puppy's behaviour.
We’re not delivering a treat as a consequence to a
behaviour, but merely pairing the sound of puppy’s
name with something good.
   So, start in a nice quiet location with no distractions.
Have plenty of small tasty treats in your treat pouch. If
need be, have puppy attached by a lead to their harness.
   For the purpose of this demonstration, my puppy will
be called ‘Colin’ (I thank you).
   Sit quietly with puppy.
  After a few seconds of nothingness, say ‘Colin’ in a
nice, cheery voice. Wait one second and then puta treat
into Colin’s mouth, regardless of Colin’s behaviour. It’s not
important if he’s not looking at you at this stage; what
is important is that we are consistently ‘charging the
battery’. ‘Colin’ - wait one second - treat.

168
Confidence




             Build an optimistic and
             confident super-pup!
                        Eye Contact




The one exercise that
makes everything else
easier.




                                      Treats in the
                                      outstretched hand —
                                      say NOTHING.    Only
                                      when pup looks to
                                      you, say ‘Good’ and
                                      reinforce!
                           Loose Lead Walk ing




Lu> ®o O oO = J© O Ww Yna)O eas) oO = © —>   + AS® =   ® D>®o oO oO S a© O ae) (e) ‘=   — ses®   S oO > ®
                     Hey, presto — loose lead walking!
The Matador Recall!


Through the legs.




                      Throw out the treat to
                      the left.




Call back to you.




                      Then through the legs
                      on the right.


                      Rinse and repeat, Olé!
                       Nose Target




                                     Nose to hand, say
                                     ‘Good’ and then treat.




Tip: To get started,
channel your inner
Mr Spock!
                The Puppy Den




                                             =

                                                       a0
                                                 ro)
                                                       =,
                                                  =
(az     is
      20 erin
                                  PRUSSSIS
                                     iets
                                eaceese




                                                 Perfect
                                 Teaching Abroad
    I’m thankful every day for the opportunities | get to teach Dog Trainers
                          and Behaviourists worldwide.




Top: Lecturing in Lithuania.

Above left: Teaching tracking
dogs in South Africa.

Above right: Staff training in
Bahrain.

Right: Visiting the amazing
dogs of Peru, birthplace of the
Rucksack Walk!
                               My Life With Dogs




Top left: My Grandad’s dog
in Ireland, Buff. His previous
dog was also called Buff. His
next dog? Buff.

Top right: | loved that damn
‘dog’!

Middle right: My heart and
soul. Me and Alfacakes
would play like this for hours.
| would give anything for
another five minutes.

Below right: From Freaky
Dog Boy to TV Dog Trainer.
Appearing on ITV with
Lorraine Kelly and Angela
Griffin.
                            REFLEX TO NAME (RTN) @%
  That’s the deal.
  100%. Every time.
  After another few seconds ... ‘Colin’ - wait one
  second - deliver treat.
  Wait five seconds, repeat. ‘Colin’ - wait one second
  - deliver treat.
  Wait three seconds, repeat...
  One second, repeat...
  Ten seconds, repeat...
  Do 25 repetitions.
  In-between repetitions say nothing. The learning will
be cleaner if we can cut out all peripheral distractions
such as other words and movements.
  Do three to four sessions a day.
  Ensure you are delivering the treat one second after
‘Colin’ and ensure you are not looking for, or even
expecting, any behaviour as a response at this time.
Then, when that has been solidly practised, change
location, then also vary the time of day and, if other
humans live with Colin, vary the trainer.
  Also, don’t always have the treats on you. We don’t
want to teach puppy that it’s only worthwhile them
tuning in to you if you’re wearing your treat pouch, as
that can be very limiting in real-life situations. Therefore,
in some of your training sessions, have the treats away
from you, perhaps in a bowl on a shelf or on the other
side of the room. Everything else remains the same, so

                                                          169
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
say ‘Colin’ then in this case run over to the shelf and
deliver the treat. Then go back to the original starting
position away from the treats and repeat...
   Once you have a nice reliable RTN (even if it’s not
puppy’s actual name you're using), you can start to ‘take
it on the road’. Introduce it into your loose lead walking
routines if you’d like puppy to check in with you more
frequently, or even use it as a much more constructive
and positive alternative to the big growly ‘LEAVE IT!’
you may have been tempted to use once or twice in the
past.
   Although we always want to be ‘training’ and not
‘testing’, over time you won't be able to ignore the
beautiful ‘head snap’ that puppy does when you say
their name. There’s the magic!
   You now have added a conditioned ‘Reflex To Name’
to your puppy training toolbox. Have the rest of the
day off!


             A WORD OF CAUTION
Remember when someone kept calling you at school, it
got quite tiresome and you eventually said, “That’s my
name, don’t wear it out!’
  Well, Colin feels the same!
  For this exercise to be as potent as possible, it’s
important    that we      don’t use puppys        name

170
                           REFLEXTO NAME (RTN) §&%
indiscriminately. Colin at this stage must always predict
that something supercool is following. If you live in a
busy household full of people saying, ‘Colin-this’ and
‘Colin-that’, then I recommend you use a new, unique
word for your RIN training. So, rather than using
puppy’s name, use a one or two syllable phrase that you
will use for what puppy should feel is always a special
occasion. As a one-off, sale-of-the-century-deal-and-for-
today-only, I’m giving these words away for free!
  — Pup-Pup!
  — Baby!
  = Yip!
  Choose one and use it wisely. It’s yours. Free!


    C) CASE STUDY: My Brian Blessed Story
2
    I was lucky enough to be the winning trainer
    on the BBC TV programme The Underdog Show,
    which took 10 of the UK’s leading dog trainers,
    and paired them with 10 celebrities to train 10
    rescue dogs on a weekly ‘live’ TV show hosted
    by Julian Clary. Due to our success on series one
    (why, thank you!), I was asked to return on series
    two as Head Judge.
      Now, one of the celebrities on series two was the
    legend that is Brian Blessed who was training a


                                                          171
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SOQUEEZY

  pointer mix called Dougal. If you don’t know who
  Brian Blessed is, he’s the larger than life BOOMING
  actor who played such wallflowers as Prince Vultan
  in Flash Gordon, Long John Silver in Treasure Island
  and, my favourite, Grampy Rabbit in Peppa Pig. If |
  you still don’t know who Brian Blessed is, imagine
  being trapped inside a kaleidoscope made out of
  foghorns and volume.
    During a quiet time in filming, Brian mentioned
  to me that he was struggling to get Dougal to
  focus on him when in front of the cameras. He
  wanted Dougal to focus on him in the same way
  that I had trained Chump to focus on Selina Scott
      in series one.
        Now, remember, how you deliver your name and
      cues is very important. If you just rattle off
      lots of words and the key word is hidden
      somewhere in that rambling sentence, then how
      on earth is a puppy supposed to know what to do?
      It’s like me listening to a rap song full of
      hundreds of words but then being expected to
      easily pick out and act upon one word from that
      mass of lyrics. When you do that with a puppy,
      they think, I’ve got to respond to everything here or
      ignore everything here. They simply can’t think, Okay,


Lhe
                         REFLEX TO NAME (RTN) (iq

ignore that, ignore that, ignore that, ah! Act on that,
then ignore that...
  So, when you give a cue it’s much better that it’s
one syllable, succinct, unique and consistent.
  So, there I am, with the legend that is Brian
Blessed and I’m trying to teach him the initial
stages of “Reflex To Name’, as per above.

Me:   Okay, Brian, I just want you to say,
      ‘Dougal’ once, then treat.
The legend that is Brian Blessed:      NOW
      DOUGAL, OH DOUGAL, YES, THAT’S
      IT, WHATTA BOY, OH, DOUGAL
      NOW THEN...
      Like that, Brian, yes. But this time, just say
      one word, ‘Dougal’, nothing else. Then
      treat.                                  |
The legend that is Brian Blessed:      Right you
       are, Steve ... AHHHH, DOUGAL MY
       BOY, WHATTA FELLA, WHATTA
       FELLA, EH, THAT’S MY BOY, NOW,
       YOU LOOK HERE, DOUGIE OLD
       BON:
       Nearly there, Brian. If you can, and I know
       you can, just say the one word ‘Dougal’


                                                          173
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

        and nothing else. That way we’re going to
        condition a perfect Reflex To Name.
| The legend that is Brian Blessed: | OH, WAS I
        NOT, DEAR BOY? CRIKEY. RIGHTO,
        HERE WE GO... NOW, DOUGAL, OH,
       YOU ARE A BEAUUUUTIFUL
        CREATURE, YES, YOU ARE, HERE WE
        GO.BOYAYES,; WE DO; OH
       YEEEEESaay WED es,
        Spot on, Brian. Good luck with tonight's
        show!




174
                  CTPiE             Rie

         EYE CONTACT


          ‘The keys to the kingdom come
                  via Eye Contact.


       WHY TEACH EYE CONTACT?
Without doubt, this is the one exercise that makes all
other exercises easier. If I had to name one exercise
as my number one, this is it! It is the foundation of
everything else in this book. Simply put, if puppy’s not
looking at you, there’s a pretty good chance that they’re
not listening to you either! Done correctly, strong and
reliable ‘Eye Contact’ can be the spine of everything else.

  I want puppy to always be thinking:

 % If there’s something in it for me, look up to the
   monkey.

                                                        175
re     EASY PEASY PUPPY BOUEEZY

      e.g. engage with my owner for play time.

 ® If I want to gain access to something, look up to
      the monkey.
      e.g. release off lead to play with other dogs.

      If I feel nervous or scared, look up to the
      monkey.
      e.g. toddler approaching on a scooter.


Unusually, I don’t add a verbal cue for eye contact. As
above, I want puppy to offer eye contact to make the
good stuff happen, as opposed to me having to ask for
it. Chances are, if I’m in a situation and I feel the need
to get puppy to look at me, the horse has already bolted.
Maybe figuratively, maybe literally!
   I love the idea that puppy is always thinking, How can
I train this monkey to...

 %    Cross the road with me?

 ww Give me a cue?

 % Open the back door?

 % Throw the ball?

  @   Keep walking along the pavement with me on
      the lead?

  Answer: look up at the monkey!

176
                                       EYECONTACT @m@
  We've previously talked about ‘cues’ for behaviour in
terms of words, but actually cues come in several forms,
so let me explain that and give you some examples. As
dog trainers (as that is what you now are, like it or not!),
we tend to think of cues being our vocal commands,
our ‘Sit’ and our ‘Come!’ and so on. But cues can come
from the surrounding environment as well as from our
mouths. For example:

 # Opening the den door may be puppy’s cue to
     run in.

     Opening the treat packet may be puppy’s cue to
     sit pretty!

 ” Hearing the doorbell may be puppy’s cue to
   go nuts or go find you. The decision is yours,
   reinforce the behaviour you want more of in
   the future!

So, I like puppy to make the first move in offering me
eye contact, if at all possible. If I do need to ask puppy
to look to me, perhaps we’re at the vets and I’ve spotted
a little old lady wandering towards us with an occupied
cat carrier before puppy has seen them. Well, I can then
ask for a ‘Reflex To Name’ (see page 167) or do a little
‘Recall’ (page 197).
   Eye contact is also an awesome ‘Mutually Exclusive
Behaviour’ (see page 155) to counter many ‘problem’

                                                         ie,
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
behaviours (they tend to be more of a problem for the
owner than they are for the puppy!). For example:

 % Puppy can’t pull on the lead during a walk if
   they're glancing up to you.

      Puppy can’t be barking at other dogs to ‘go play’
      if they're glancing up to you.

 ‘Puppy can’t be bouncing and jumping up at the
   child in the park you’re chatting to if they’re
   glancing up to you.

You get the picture. Convinced? Cool, let’s crack on
with the training:


      EYE CONTACT: THE PUPPY STEPS
               OF TRAINING
  1. Sit on the floor with puppy and have a handful
     of treats in your closed fist. Hold your treat-
     laden fist out in front of you.

  2. Say nothing. (This is the hardest part of the
     exercise, particularly for men!) Let puppy lick
     your hand, paw your hand, etc. They will try a
     host of various behaviours to get at the treats.
     Our skill here is in waiting until we get the
      behaviour we want.


178
                                        EYECONTACT
  3. Keep your eyes fixed on puppy’s face, then the
     second they glance up at you say ‘Good!’, and
     give them a treat from the hand. As ever, don’t
     be too greedy here; a glance towards your upper
     body at this stage is enough to make you say
     ‘Good’ and deliver the treat. As your repetitions
     progress, we can raise the criteria and ‘shape’
     the behaviour from a ‘torso glance’ to ‘Eye
     Contact’. Anyway, let’s continue...

  4, Let puppy enjoy and finish each treat. Then
     bring your treat-laden hand around to the front
     again and do another repetition.


We need three vital ingredients for this exercise, and in
fact for all exercises, to be as effective as possible:

  1. Motivation: is puppy super-motivated for the
     treats? If not, get better treats or train initially in
     a less distracting location or at a different time
     of day. Remember, puppies don’t lose focus, they
     only change focus.

  2. Patience: relax, it’s not a race. As long as you
     can see that puppy is motivated for the food,
     then, through trial and error, puppy will figure
     out what behaviour pays dividends. (My dad

                                                           179
rf     EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

      used to say, ‘Patience is a virtue, have it if you
      can, it’s seldom in a puppy, and never in a man”)
           °            .                        .         )




  3. Timing: for puppy to realise exactly what
     behaviour paid the dividends, make sure you
     have the timing of a Ninja by saying ‘Good!’ the
     second puppy’s eyes look to yours, then deliver
     the treat.


The fact that you’re saying “Good’ to ‘mark’ the
behaviour means that you don’t have to be in a rush to
deliver the food. For perfect conditioning, ensure you
say ‘Good’ then start the process of moving your hand
to feed. Separate the two actions. If you don’t ‘mark’ the
behaviour with a ‘Good’, then puppy will still enjoy the
food, but they won’t know why they got it, which means
they won’t know what behaviour to repeat next time.
  As with all exercises, repeat, repeat, repeat.
   Do the above in a variety of locations to proof the
behaviour (see page 88) and remember to initially
keep your sessions short and sweet. If motivation is
good, you should get a good 10 to 15 ‘Eye Contacts’ to
reinforce in a five to ten-minute session. You’re much
better to do several short sessions in various locations
throughout the day, than a marathon session that will
see a tapering off of motivation, reinforcement and,
therefore, progress.

180
                                      EYE.CONTACT


              ADDING DURATION
For the above points 1-4, we’ve focused on initially
getting and then immediately reinforcing the behaviour
of eye contact. For real-life scenarios when you'll want
that eye contact for longer (as the scary dog walks by, for
example) and to build your “connection stamina’, let’s
start adding a bit of duration to your training:

  1. Complete the above steps until your pup’s a
     ‘looking machine’!

  2. When pup gives you eye contact, wait one
     second before saying ‘Good’ and reinforcing.
     Repeat, repeat, repeat.

  3. When pup gives you eye contact, wait two
     seconds before saying ‘Good’ and reinforcing.
     Repeat, repeat, repeat.

  4. Over time, increase the eye contact duration
     within each session; however, throw a cheeky
     little one-or two-second short one every now
     and then to keep puppy engaged and never
     quite knowing when the ‘Good’ will come.
     Think payouts on a ‘fruit machine’, rather than
     a vending machine!



                                                        181
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

                    FUNK IT UP!
So, as soon as you sit down with pup and place your
loaded fist out in front of you, are you getting immediate
eye contact? Yes? Great, then let’s get funky with it!
  Keep the common denominator of pup looks to you =
‘Good’ = treat, but change the picture every now and then
to ensure that no matter what else is going on around
you, you can rely on a rock-solid eye contact behaviour
from puppy.
  Do the exercise from a chair; do it standing up; or,
if you're feeling cheeky, do it lying down. Do it by the
school gates, near the ice-cream van or at the park.
   Contrary to popular belief, practice does not make
perfect. Perfect practice makes perfect, so make sure you
set the correct criteria and work through all of the many
distractions you can think of to earn yourself the perfect
puppy eye contact.


 Zo) CASE STUDY: Lorraine and Angus
  I’ve had the pleasure to guest on ITV’s Lorraine
  show a couple of times with Lorraine Kelly and her
  cracking little Border terrier pup, Angus. Lorraine
  was having the usual puppy problems like play-
  biting, toilet training, recall, introducing Angus to


182
                                 EYECONTACT

other dogs, etc. However, what was brilliant about
her approach was that she was taking Angus into
the studio pretty much from the word go. When
we talk about training with distractions, I’m not
sure there’s a much more distracting environment |
than a live TV studio! Because Angus is lucky’ |
enough to go to work with Lorraine each day, it
was essential we taught him eye contract straight
away so he and Lorraine were always on the same
‘frequency, regardless of what was going on around
them. They have a great relationship because Angus
knows that checking in with ‘Mum’ is the conduit
to all good things including training, affection, fun
and safety. That’s all thanks to eye contact and
Lorraine’s hard work.




                                                     183
                                                                                     7—                                  _2                —                             -
                                                                                                                                                        -        :
                                                                                                                 ae                =       TH
                                                               Vi                                                         a                                          -
                                                                                                    Sp                        Me                             7
                 ’                 a           doen                      >»                   st)
                                                                                                    : a0         6) fy
                                                                                                                          -                    '
                                                                        _—                          i




                                                                                                                 -
                          _                ~    a     oe                 en               A              7                  eo

                                                                                                .                        we                    At Lae                                               Y
                                                                                                                         ars  2                                      wes.       Oo   --                  Pa




                              ie sere                                        hd Oem Cae                                                                     eet i fob am
                                                                                 ‘
                                               a:                   reese                                                                  one              ols pce.                                              : wii
             +           dell          a                                ea                                                     Mises                        UTC aidanemeeaite                                                 s

                                                                                              sTEaky oFshine                                                tarps : rhanietetthet                                        -|
             ;                                  bene                         4                               P           -                     -                              ae          »
as   3
             |       ’
                          -Madeur tical eas fares: ht shame:© ctrabemeds tom +
                                                           ,        =            4                       ~           .             i               <-   @        me            os             eq        *_@


             5 oq isl raceme,                                                                                                                               frre way sail eraser :
             ;       .   aes                                                                                                                                                  > fae                                  i   fs   t
             y            1S are                     YT of nena al Ag ut a                                                                                                          Buhoma
=

         _   '. tienes:                                msviods i273                                                                opted ar iguint: =e Lares                                                                  is

.;           foompom                            lh nc                                         cawle ven atic) bo adn
                                                                                                                   —
                                                                                                                     teh 7
             e                                         :
                         Merits cae alae < edibetindte
;            a


             b
                     a


                              vente Sening )yistrotielas lyory weet —
—:           j                      ,
             Perel ar, aft                                              ss agi                                                         sien ul earviabirake a
a
                                                                             4 apace                                                       apnatel Toast a>                                        ct          OS
5                    Ate a earlsie
                                                                                                                                                                                                              a

                     het ‘inhsang2 game?                                                                         %                 phere Becca

                      :                         ae                       me                                  acct                                  wpk                       abechieted                       Soot
                                                                                                                                       \                                     ———
                                                                                                                 oA) a
                   GEA
                     P ERs 44

           LOOSE LEAD
            WALKING



WHAT IS LOOSE LEAD WALKING AND
 WHY DO YOU NEED TO TEACH IT?
Puppy is walking alongside you in a relaxed and happy
manner. You’re holding the lead which is attached to
puppy's harness and as the pair of you walk with each
other, the lead is ‘smiling’. It’s so important for puppy’s
quality of life that they regularly go for walks with you to
enjoy exploring and interacting with the ‘outside’ world.
Walking with your puppy has the potential to be one of
the most enjoyable activities of your lives together. It
also has the potential to be one of the most miserable
experiences you could ever imagine if you don’t teach
correct ‘Loose Lead Walking’! Unnecessary tension on

                                                        185
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
the lead can cause physical (and mental!) strains on both
of you.


  WHY DO DOGS PULL ON THE LEAD?
Dominance? Nope!
  They want to be Pack Leader? Nope!
  They generally walk faster than humans? Yep!
  Our job is to teach them that walking ‘with’ us is the
behaviour that pays the best dividends. The quickest
way to get to the good stuff - the next great smell, the
park, the other dog - is to walk together on a slack lead.


  LOOSE LEAD WALKING: THE PUPPY
        STEPS OF TRAINING
As per the previous chapter, if puppy is checking in with
you when you're stationary, you've got ‘Eye Contact’.
If puppy's checking in with you on the move, you’ve
got ‘Loose Lead Walking’! You’ve already built the
foundation of your loose lead walking by investing in
eye contact, so let’s just move it up a notch and blend
eye contact into loose lead walking. We’re working on
the theory that if puppy is looking at you on the move,
they can’t pull on the lead at the same time.

  1. Start offlead. Be standing, have your treat-laden

186
                           LOOSE LEAD WALKING @&
     fist in front of you. Slowly walk backwards in
     tiny steps so pup follows you; once they look at
     you on the move say ‘Good!’ and reinforce.

  2. Repeat your tiny backward steps and reinforce
     each time puppy looks at you on the move.

  3. Change your direction: rather than walking
     backwards, take tiny steps to the side, left to
     right, or walk in a slow arch. As ever, when
     puppy looks at you on the move say ‘Good’ and
     reinforce. This is good stuff!

  4, As above, but now have the light lead attached
     to puppy's harness as an added distraction.
     ‘Mark’ and reinforce any eye contact on the
     move. Be careful not to tread on the lead, move
     slowly with tiny steps at this stage.

  5. As above, but hold the lead.

  6. As above, but change location.

  7. As above, but start walking more in a forward,
     ‘normal’ motion with standard stride lengths.

  8. Use as many locations as possible to ‘proof’ the
     behaviour.

Hey Presto, your pup’s a ‘Loose Lead Walker’! You'll
both get to enjoy your walks in comfort. Puppy’s delicate

                                                        187
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
body will not be damaged by pulling on a tight lead and
youll get to keep both of your collar bones. Win!
  As you've already uploaded the eye contact ‘software’
into puppy, it’s an awesome behaviour to then upgrade
into loose lead walking; however, the beauty of dog
training is as long as you know your ingredients, you
can come up with as many different recipes as you
fancy. Let’s have a look at some other loose lead walking
techniques below...


           DRUNK DOG WALKING
I developed ‘Drunk Dog Walking’ during my many
years of teaching puppy group classes as a great way to
get quick success. I guess some day | should add one of
those funky little ™ or © signs but you know what, mi
Casa es su casa.
  Start with puppy on a nice long lead, approximately
1.5 metres in length, attached to their comfortable
harness. Have your two hands together by your
belt buckle area. If you’re the type to instinctively
grab further down the lead, therefore making the
lead unnecessarily tight, then have your two hands
together and pop your two thumbs down the top of
your trousers. There, that’s your ‘Mutually Exclusive
Behaviour’ sorted! Have your treat pouch clipped onto
your waist and make sure it’s loaded with plenty of

188
                            LOOSE LEAD WALKING @&
small but amazing treats. Before you set off, reinforce
a few repetitions of the eye contact exercise so puppy
knows it’s time to tune in.

  1. You’re going to very slowly walk no more than
     five steps in any one direction in a style that is
     as ‘un-dog-trainerlike-fashion’ as possible. No
     fast straight lines, no 90 degree turns (what
     is it with dog trainers and 90 degree turns?
     I’ve never seen anyone walk that way down
     the park!). Take nice small steps; some out to
     the front, now in a crescent, now backwards.
    Super-slow, super-small and constantly changing
    direction. You know, the kind of hesitant steps
    you take at 3am on a Saturday morning when
    youre trying to aim your key into your front
    door? Hence the name: ‘Drunk Dog Walking’.

  2. Here’s the deal: if, as you move, the lead
    is slack, say ‘Good’ and give puppy a treat.
    Ideally, give the treat to your puppy ‘on the
    move’. It’s a great opportunity for puppy to
    learn that good stuff sometimes comes from the
    monkey when we’re walking, as well as when
    youre stationary. If we only ever treat the
    puppy when we're standing still, puppy will
    soon zone out when we’re on the move.

                                                          189
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

      REINFORCEMENT PLACEMENT
Puppies, like us, hang out where the good stuff is. If, in the
future, we want puppy to walk on our left-hand side, then
that’s where the treats should be delivered to. If we want
puppy to be walking on our right-hand side, that’s cool,
just make sure that is where the reinforcement delivery
occurs.   (N.B.   there’s   this time-honoured    (nonsense)
rule in many dog training clubs that dogs should walk
on the owner’s left-hand side. This is just one of those
indoctrinated rules that rarely gets questioned. Have you
ever asked why? The original reason was that back in the
day when dog training was only targeted towards military
handlers, all dogs were trained to ‘Heel’ on the left-hand
side so that the handler could still have easy access to
reach and fire their gun. Today, in puppy classes, I hardly
ever ask owners to shoot someone, so it’s now a moot
point. Do what’s most comfortable for you.)
  After several short sessions, it’s time to raise the bar.
Set off as before, and for the first few repetitions of slack
lead say ‘Good’ and treat. The next time you’re slowly
moving and the lead is slack, don’t automatically say
‘Good’ or treat ... wait.
  What we’re looking for here is for puppy to say to
themselves, I’m walking here next to my buddy and I don’t
feel any tight lead tension on my harness so I’m due a treat.
Where’s my treat?

190
                            LOOSE LEAD WALKING @&
   The second they glance up to you in anticipation as if
to say, ‘Oi! Where’s my treat?!’ then you say ‘Good!’ and
reinforce.
   Now we have a new criteria and we're actually giving
the treat as a consequence to the behaviour of puppy
looking up and ‘checking in’ with you on the move.
Eye contact on the move - the loose lead walking stuff
of dreams!
   Don’t be in too much of a hurry here: despite what
other books and trainers will tell you, loose lead
walking is bloomin’ hard! Take it steady and, as always,
consolidate your training in as many different locations
as possible to get a nice strong foundation.
   Initially keep sessions short: five to ten minutes per
session is great to start off with. Let puppy know it’s
‘Training Time’, which should always translate as ‘Fun
Time’ or ‘The Window Of Awesome Opportunity
Has Just Opened Time!’ or TWOFOHJOT™ for short.
(*Although this may also be a wardrobe from IKEA.)
   I like to let puppy know it’s “Training Time’ by having
a little play as I say, ‘Wanna do a bit of training, buddy?’
I'll then do a few repetitions of eye contact to get us in
the zone. Sounds silly, I know, but it’s a nice way for us
both to focus on each other. Imagine having dancing
lessons but never knowing when they’re taking place;
you'd be all over the place!


                                                        191
Wf easy PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY

           ADDING OUR THREE DS
Once you’re walking a few steps together and puppy is
looking up to you every now and then, we can begin
to manipulate our Three Ds. You’re familiar with the
concept of the Three Ds now, but here it is in relation
to loose lead walking:

Distance: rather than rewarding as soon as the lead
is slack on the move, see if you can go two or three steps
with the lead still ‘smiling’ before you say ‘Good’ and
reinforce. Then four to five steps, then over five steps...

Duration: rather than rewarding as soon as the lead is
slack on the move, or focusing on the number of steps
before reinforcing, try changing your pace, sometimes
two to three quick little steps, sometimes two to three
slo-mo little steps. The criteria you’re setting here is the
duration of slack lead. Reinforce after two to three seconds
of slack lead on the move, then four to five, then over five
seconds.


Distraction: as above, but by practising in various
locations you will naturally be training in environments
of differing distractions. However, always aim for success.
If a particular environment is too distracting for puppy,
then it’s simply too distracting for them. Relocate from

192
                             LOOSE LEAD WALKING @&
that area or just relax, don’t worry about your loose
lead walking for now and just sit with puppy to let them
watch, learn and absorb the environment around them.
If they need to check it out, they need to check it out.
Don’t get into a conflict with them by insisting on being
a Trainy-Trainer-Head.
  Tomorrow’s another day.
  Your relationship comes first.


   THE ANTI-DOG TRAINER METHOD
       OF LOOSE LEAD WALKING
Here’s one to upset all the pros!
  On the face of it, the method I’ve developed below
may seem a little topsy-turvy and I guess it is, but there’s
a method in the madness, so let me explain...
  Our target is for puppy not to pull on the lead.
  Definition of pulling on the lead = walking several
steps with the lead tight between puppy and handler.
  What if we could invent a self-correcting puppy? We'll
be rich, rich, I tell ya!



        Self-Correcting: The Puppy Steps
                    of Training
  1. Do a few repetitions of your eye contact exercise,
     with you standing nice and still. This will get

                                                         193
re, EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
      puppy in the zone and also, importantly, remind
      them that ‘Good!’ predicts a treat from you.

  2. Hold the lead full length, with two hands together
     by your belt buckle area. Slowly start walking,
     small steps, in a straight line.

  3. As soon as the lead goes tight, say ‘Good’ and give
     puppy a treat. Head. Explodes.


Don’t worry. You’re not reinforcing pulling on the lead
here. What you are doing is building your self-correcting
puppy. Trust me on this one, I do it for a living!
  Remember, the definition of pulling on the lead is
walking several steps with the lead tight between puppy
and handler. By you giving puppy a treat the split-second
the lead goes tight, the predictor for the treat becomes
‘tight lead’.
      Now we have a two-stage process:

  1. Tight lead = ‘Good’ = treat from handler

  2. Tight lead = look back to handler in anticipation
     of treat = ‘Good’ = treat

Do a few repetitions of (1) to build the relationship
between tight lead and checking in with you. Once you
see evidence that puppy is looking back to you when
the lead is tight before you’ve even said ‘Good’, then

194
                            LOOSE LEAD WALKING @&
you can move on to stage (2). As soon as puppy knows
what the predictor of the treat is, and as long as they’re
motivated for the food, there’s no way they'll continue
to pull on the lead.
   This method gives us an opportunity to crack on and
progress with our training nice and quickly. Once we’ve
reinforced puppy ‘self-correcting’ and looking back to
us, we can then carry on from a more logical standpoint,
which is: reinforce puppy intermittently as they walk
with you on a slack lead. Constantly adjusting distance,
distraction and duration as appropriate.


                    FUNK IT UP!
Don’t be afraid to throw other cheeky little cues that
youve already taught puppy into your loose lead walking
sessions. For example, a few steps then a ‘Sit’ or some
downright funky cues that you'll learn later in this book
such as “Nose Target’ and “To the Fridge!’




                                                       195
re    EASY PEASYPUPPYSOUEEZY


| ) CASE STUDY: The Dog Said Nothing
  True story! One of my alltime favourite sightings
  down the park was when I was out doing a one-to-
  one loose lead training session with an owner and
  dog in Richmond Park. (By the way, Richmond
  Park is home of the YouTube ‘Fenton’ sensation. If
  you think your pup has a bad recall, treat yourself to
  0.47 seconds of pure YouTube madness!)
    Anyhoo, the owner and dog I| was training were
  doing fantastically well and walking along the path
  with a lovely loose ‘smiling’ lead to consolidate all
  they had learned. Coming along the path in the
  other direction was a guy with a German shepherd
  on the lead and to say the dog was pulling would
  be a massive understatement. The guy looked both
  exhausted and completely exasperated. In a last-
  ditch effort to stop his dog pulling, he stopped,
  walked around to face the dog and with a pointed
  finger said, ‘Look! We spoke about this before we
  left home!’
     The dog said nothing.
     I gave the man my card.




196
                   Coe
                    os gl dg isBw

                  RECALL



            WHAT DOES A RECALL
                LOOK LIKE?
As soon as you call ‘Come!’ puppy comes thundering
towards you with the speed of a puma!


           WHY TEACH A RECALL?
If you ever plan to have puppy offlead outside, it’s
essential that you have an epic ‘Recall’ for safety and to
ensure each outing is as pleasurable as possible for both
of you. Potentially, a brilliant recall might actually save
your puppy’s life if they are running off towards a road
or other dangerous situation. It’s that important.


                                                        197
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY


      RECALL THE: PUPPras IEPs OF
             . TRAINING
We're actually spoilt for choice on how to teach a
‘Recall’, so I’ve added a few bonus tracks to the album
for you. Below are several methods and techniques to
train puppy to be a “Total Recaller’! Don’t just choose
one method; do them all in different sessions and in
different locations to keep your training interesting
and fun.
  A few notes before we start: for all recalls, we want
to be reinforcing puppy running to you, not just a slow
walk or trot. We'll ultimately get what we reinforce and
if a slow, unmotivated meander is considered ‘good
enough’ in your controlled training sessions, then the
recall will easily be knocked off track when we ‘go live’
down the park with the added distractions of dogs,
birds and fox poo!
  We want your cue of ‘Come!’ to always be super-
friendly as it needs to predict that great things are
coming from you for puppy. NEVER call puppy in an
angry voice, no matter how tempting! An angry voice or
body language does not predict great things are coming
from you for puppy, therefore you'll ‘poison’ your cue,
leading to a hesitant recall in the future.
  We also always want your recall cue to be super-potent.
We do not want puppy to get in the habit of ignoring

198
                                             RECALL @&
your cue as that will dilute its potency in the future and
the standards will deteriorate. If you’re not prepared to
bet £100 that puppy will come to you on the first call of
‘Come!’ then don’t call them. Go over and get puppy
yourself. The exercise will be good for you!
  And finally, pay well. Like I said, a good recall could
be a lifesaver. It’s a great investment, so be generous with
the reinforcement.



         THE RESTRAINED RECALL
For this exercise, we need two people (you and one
other, let’s call him “Woodhouse’)


  1. Have Woodhouse crouch down and gently hold
     puppy by their harness while you show them the
     treats in your hand.

  2. Run away, as Woodhouse continues to hold
     puppy's harness. Once you’re 10 metres or so
     away, have Woodhouse release puppy to sprint
     towards you. As soon as puppy is running
     towards you, keep jogging and shout “COME!”
     in a loud and happy voice. What we’re doing
     above is pairing the behaviour of ‘running to
     you’ with the cue ‘Come!’ We want to train and
     to practise for what we'll ultimately need when

                                                        199
Ff casy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
      were down the park. You'll be calling puppy in
      a loud voice when they’re a distance away from
      you, so start conditioning as you mean to go on
      to make sure your cue remains consistent.

  3. As soon as puppy catches up to you, crouch
     down, give them a big fuss and reward them
     with the treats you're holding.

  4. Repeat as above several times. Then repeat again
     but start saying ‘Come!’ just before Woodhouse
     releases puppy to run to you. Now we've got
     everything in the correct order: ‘Come!’ =
      puppy running to you = reinforcement = (a
      happy puppy + a happy you) = a happy me!
  5. Extra tip: to maintain puppy’s speed as they
     catch up to you, try throwing the treats in the
     direction puppy is running just before they
     get to you.



                    FUNK IT UP!
Once youre flying through stages 1-4 as above, let’s funk
it up a little by turning you into a ‘Recalling Matador’!

  1. As puppy catches up to you, face puppy and
      throw the treat between your legs, encouraging

200
                                             RECALL (aq
     puppy to then also go between your legs to get
     the treat. This will increase the speed of recall
     because they accelerate right up to and through
     your legs, rather than hitting the brakes five
     metres away.

  2. Turn and face puppy, as they finish their treat as _
     above and then look up to you, say ‘Come!’ and
     throw another treat between your legs for puppy
     to chase after.

  3. As puppy eats, jog away IN THE OPPOSITE
     DIRECTION to increase the distance between
     you, THEN face puppy again to make the
     recall game even more fun by turning it into an
     exciting game of ‘catch up’ or ‘chase’.

  4. Each time puppy sprints between your legs to
     get their reward, add more and more distance to
     the next repetition.

  5. N.B. you do not need to say, ‘Olé’!


                RECALL CIRCUITS
This is a lovely recall exercise to do if you’re restricted
to a small area or if you don’t have your own personal
‘Woodhouse’ to call upon! It’s also a nice exercise to
transfer to the park, as the small space required means

                                                         201
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
you'll be less likely to bump into potential distractions
coming up over the horizon.

  ie Use three markers (such as flower pots) or just
     your imagination to lay out a triangle on the
     ground, with three sides approximately 10 strides
     in length. Stand at point one with puppy. Say
     ‘Comel’, quickly place three or four treats on the
     ground by your feet and as puppy begins to eat,
     you sneak away to point two. Even though puppy
     is stood next to you, still shout ‘Come!’ prior
     to placing the treats on the ground. It’s a free
     opportunity to show puppy what the sound of
     ‘Come!’ actually predicts (good stuff!).

      . You’re now stood by point two, facing puppy as
        they eat the treats from the ground back at point
        one. As soon as puppy finishes the treats and
        looks up, you shout ‘Come!’ and place a further
        three or four treats by your feet.

      . As soon as puppy gets to you at point two to eat
       their treats, you run away to point three.

      . As soon as puppy looks up from finishing their
        treats at point two, shout, ‘Come!’ from position
        three and place three or four treats at your feet for
        puppy to run to.

202
                                             RECALL iq
  5. Repeat ... forever!

Don’t just use one piece of food per drop (you miser!).
The reason I want you to use three or four pieces is the
extra time required for puppy to pick up the food will
give you the time necessary to make good your getaway
to the next point of the triangle. Over time this will also
help you add distance to your recalls.


              FULCRUM RECALLS
Don’t fancy all the energy-sapping exercise required
in the previous two recall exercises? Should’ve got a
goldfish then, eh?!
  Okay, for “Fulcrum Recall’ training you really don’t
have to break out of a slow walk and it’s a really nice
exercise to blend into your normal walks. It’s called the
fulcrum because you are the ‘centre’ of all the puppy’s
movements.

  1. Let puppy see you throw a treat out to your left-
     hand side.

  2. As puppy eats the treat and then looks up, say,
     ‘Come!’ and as puppy runs to you, throw a treat
     out to your right-hand side.

  3. You can continue a slow and steady walk, wait

                                                       203
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
      until puppy looks up and then say ‘Come!’ and
      throw a treat back out to your left-hand side.

This is a nice, informal exercise that you can blend into
your walks at random intervals. You’re reinforcing the
recalls but also puppy is learning that it’s worth their
while to keep an eye on you when out and about in
anticipation of the recall game commencing again!


         ‘CAPTURING’
                  THE RECALL
If puppy just happens to offer a behaviour you love, like
coming to you on a walk, even if you haven’t cued it,
then ‘capture’ the behaviour by reinforcing it with a great
treat. If the ‘captured’ behaviour is reinforced, then that
behaviour becomes more likely to occur again in the
future. You'll be surrounded by opportunities to capture
and reinforce great behaviours offered by puppy, so don’t
miss your chance to fill pup’s ‘list of things to do’ with the
behaviours you love! What gets treated gets repeated!
   To constantly improve puppy’s recall, make sure you
do the above exercises in a constant variety of locations
to really ‘proof the behaviour and make it as reliable as
possible. No matter what others may say (brag), no dog has
a completely 100% perfectly reliable recall, so appreciate
that it is, and always will be, a work in progress.
   Enjoy the journey.

204
                                             RECALL @&

         THE EMERGENCY RECALL
But what if puppy gets loose by accident before I’ve
taught a recall? What if I discover the recall I thought I
taught isn’t as reliable as I thought I’d taught it! What if
puppy is off-lead and the little tinker won’t come back?
   Okay, so if this happens, then this isn’t a training
opportunity, it’s an emergency. If you’re built for speed
(e.g. you're Usain Bolt), and your puppy isn’t (e.g. they're
a bulldog!), then run and grab your puppy before they
get into trouble. However, if your puppy is playing ‘stay
away and you know you're not going to catch them,
then try one of the below:

     Lay on the floor and kick your legs up in the air
     as you make weird noises. (I bet you wish you
     taught a better recall now!) The whole weirdness
     of the situation will often serve to draw the
     curious puppy back to you.

     Run in the opposite direction away from puppy.
     This may hopefully encourage puppy to chase
     you in fear of being abandoned.

 @ Pull out puppy’s favourite toy and start whooping
   and playing with it yourself. If you look like
   youre having the time of your life, hopefully
   puppy will want a piece of the action, too.

                                                         205
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
  As I say, none of the above three methods are training
tools, they’re merely emergency options if you haven’t
yet taught a bullet-proof recall.
  The most important point about recall is perhaps
this simple fact: be careful when out with puppy, don’t
let them off-lead if it’s not safe to do so, they’re just
too precious.



|O CASE STUDY: A Cautionary Tale!
  Not only is having a poor recall potentially
  dangerous, but it can also cost you a fair few quid!
  I was lucky enough to be recruited to help train TV
  presenter Graham Norton’s dog, Bailey, who was a
  real ‘life-loving’ labradoodle, when he was around
  two years old. The first time I met Graham, he
  told me that, like all good, responsible dog owners,
  before he headed out for a dog walk he would
  grab the lead, some spare poo bags and plenty of |
  treats. However, due to Bailey’s habit of ignoring |
  his recall cue in favour of raiding the conveniently
  spread picnics around Hyde Park, Graham also
  had to make sure that along with packing the treats
  and poo bags before a walk, he also had to grab a
  fresh supply of tenners from the ATM as he was
  constantly running in Bailey’s wake handing out


206
                                         RECALL (eR

compensatory £10 notes to those who now had
paw prints all over their quiche lorraine!
  We decided to take it back a few steps, so we
taught Bailey the value of ‘Come’ in a much less
distracting environment. Over the weeks, we worked
on recall circuits and, at any given opportunity, we “|
reinforced Bailey every time he voluntarily checked
in with Graham when out on walks. Importantly,
we didn’t have Bailey offlead in any areas in which
we weren't confident that he could immediately,
and successfully, respond to our recall.
  Over time, as Bailey’s recall became more and
more robust in an everexpanding number of
distracting environments, Graham was eventually
able to continue his dog walking in Hyde Park
without having to wrestle the odd Scotch egg from
Bailey’s mush.




                                                   207
|                                                     Lect                                      ea                a                          nlgabere’, (i Brgt                                  ‘
:                                                                                      + ‘The               ea ipeaty
|
                                                                                                                                                   Siset? 70
                                     oe oneal aba ila li
                                                                                                                                                                        iiaesta wits :


                     |                                                  bed fufee! tek? tol culo soty nadieDpsratin
Ae
                                                                        win Bi                  apie sia seal
                                                                                                            MERCIA                                                                                   bo
                                                                                             ritaariy                 mown           he         i aMt AL lntyras Hecers ade=
                     :                        ves          alt                     %         A vested             leap             a: tet? peyrs.va! nal                         bievsicades 7   ie
7                    ;           _                             :               :         ;          s       tan       ah       eet       7     a       ee             me]                             oa

a                                                   “ewan                                                   slow                   meu              core meet                       caiw t., iz
        :                "                                                    Meer              STV,                       PB Cele                                                          >
WE                               Pe                                            ee                           ec eek oo ‘afte wea 2‘abi 3                                                              a
=                        4                                               ;                              ;
                                 J gatuiosherniy bien sed toe ittsinflantr Jama
                                                           .                                    t ouidegetcertac team bat rach waitnitocmsis                                                         x
            cs               * are Sade, erissgh tiebor orale Meisels idl i:
                                  asia tanger ae, Vka eras Oe i
                                     oftia a                                                                  trated                                                         A                   ; 7
                                              —_                                                                  x ae a
ae
in
Sk
ee                                       jdayf,                               ul: 72                ik       a         Eom                             ye

                                 a getee Fstapel
                                               chapAas alimoshizyineyrameatt                                                                                             her
Ti



                            ne       ,j ' ,
                             - tut hotles?                                                                                     out be a                               voli
-
2Rveoh-          i
                     EE
                     a - i? ms    s                                                                                            7     ;
                                                                                                                                         oe                 =
                                                                                                                                                                =~
                             *emcnboepiy es                                                     :             7            ‘                       _             is



                                         mae: blepapas Bie tcp-Breit
ary                          i                                                         f       _ in
                                                    “=                        Fae pa a ancane aa
                                                                                                 n
                                     Sr             Fes

a
    -       a
                                         }                         or
                     ena,
                      aw
                      =
                      oes
                                 =€¢

=-                   -                        =.
                         S'                  «as
                         @                           “~~
                         a)                          ~



                         |
                                 2              ry                      Pel
                                     —
                                         ¥
                                     _                             ad
                  PARP
                     a              Ri

         NOSE TARGET




       WHAT DOES A NOSE TARGET
             LOOK LIKE?
You hold out your hand, say “Touch’ and puppy touches
their nose against your hand!


       WHY TEACH NOSE TARGET?
A good nose target has lots of potentially great benefits
that aren’t offered by other exercises. It can:

 ®” Build a positive association with human hands.

     Encourage ‘four feet on the floor’ when greeting
     people.

                                                      209
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
 Pd Maintain a still position during handling
    exercises, such as grooming or health treatments.
 ye
       Turn puppy’s attention to you if you’re in the
       presence of someone that isn’t comfortable
       around dogs.



      NOSE TARGET: THE PUPPY STEPS
               OF TRAINING
      . Place a treat between the third and fourth finger
        of your right hand (think Mr Spock!).

      . Make sure puppy’s attention is on you and place
        your right hand behind your back.

      . From behind your back, present your right hand
        in front of you 30 centimetres from puppy's
        nose. The novelty of your freshly presented
        hand coupled with the lure of the treat between
        your fingers will entice puppy to move their
        nose towards your hand.

      . As soon as puppy’s nose touches your hand, say
        ‘Good!’, then put your right hand back behind
        your back and reinforce with a treat from your
        other hand. The reason you do not reinforce
        with the treat in your ‘target’ hand is that

210
                                      NOSETARGET @&
    we don’t want puppy to learn it’s only worth
    touching the hand if there’s a treat in it. The
    reason you ‘produce’ and ‘remove’ your right
    hand prior to, and after, the nose touch is to
    keep the presentation of the right hand unique,
    and therefore part of the cue. Pups are curious
    creatures so they’re more likely to want to ‘check
    out’ the hand if it’s just appeared.

   . After several successful repetitions, try a few
     without the lure (treat) between your right-hand
     fingers.

   . Once the behaviour is nice and fluent, starting
     adding the cue “Touch’ as you present your hand
     (get the behaviour, say ‘Good’ and reinforce with
     a treat as before). The reason we want to put this
    behaviour on a vocal cue is because sometimes
    we will want to ask for the behaviour when
    puppy isn’t necessarily looking at us.


              ADDING DURATION
A quick “Touch’ cue followed by the desired behaviour
will give us the attention we need to steer puppy
away from the dreaded ice cream or perhaps to get a
mutually exclusive behaviour instead of jumping up
at people. However, if we can get a nose touch with

                                                          ail
Wf! easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
a longer duration, then we can use the behaviour for
handling and grooming sessions, too. To do this:

  1. Continue as page 210 with the Puppy Steps of
      Training.

  2. Progress to give your cue - “Touch’ - then when
     puppy puts their nose to your hand, rather than
     saying ‘Good’ as soon as contact is made, wait
     one second, then - and only if the nose is still
     touching - say ‘Good’ and reinforce with a treat.
     Over time, increase the duration of the touch
      with each session.

  3. As with all exercises, to raise the criteria,
      manipulate the Three Ds.


                     FUNK IT UP!
Okay, so now we're getting plenty of nose touches
from puppy when we're asking for them. Let’s change
the context with some of the examples below to really
proof the behaviour and to make it a little funkier for
you both!

 ‘’ Get a ‘Touch’ then throw the treat a few metres
    away from you for puppy to chase and eat. As
    soon as puppy looks back up after having eaten
    the treat, say “Touch’, offer your hand and when

212
                                   NOSE TARGET @&
   puppy’s nose touches your hand, then mark
   and reinforce as before by throwing another treat.
   This method puts more animation into the
   exercise and is a great foundation for your recall
   training. It also combines all the things puppies
   love: running, sniffing, eating, learning and
   being with you.

   Rather than producing your hand at the same
   level all the time, funk it up by producing it up
   high, down low, between your legs, etc. Keep
   puppy engaged by keeping them guessing as to
   where the hand will appear next!



zo) CASE STUDY: 99 Problems
True story. Waaaaay back many years ago when |
was a kid, I was walking a neighbour’s Dalmatian
puppy along a narrow promenade by the seafront.
As we happily strolled, we were approached by a
family heading towards us. One of the children in
the family, a boy aged around five, was wrestling
but certainly getting the better of an ice cream
big enough to choke a donkey. You guessed it,
as the boy passed us, and without breaking her
stride, the puppy shot out a tongue that would


                                                       213
all EASY PEASY PUPPY SOQUEEZY



      make a salamander proud and slurped around
      four-fifths of the ice cream clean out of the cone!
      I’m not proud, dear Reader, but me and puppy
      kept on walking, no one but the boy had noticed,
      and when I finally mustered the courage to look
      back from about 30 metres away, the poor kid was
      stood there, empty cone in hand, looking like the
      Statue of Liberty had just been shown a card trick!




214
                   Chia
                      WE             Rely

         THE TROUBLE
         WITH ‘LEAVE’


     he way    you're training   puppy      is by employing
     what is Known in dog training circles as ‘Operant
Conditioning’. You’re asking for a behaviour, and then
positively reinforcing that particular behaviour in order
for it to become more fluent and reliable in the future.
  That’s a really clean and efficient way for you to teach
and for puppy to learn. No fallout, no dodgy side effects
and every delivery of that positive reinforcement comes
with a bonus track of positive associations to you, the
environment and training in general, all of which are
sound investments for your relationship.
  So, what about “Leave”? The problem with using a ‘Leave’
cue, is that it doesn’t teach puppy what you actually want
them to do. ‘Leave’ tends to be a go-to instruction that us

                                                         215
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

humans will attempt to use with our puppies, but think
about it, it’s not really a clear instruction of what to do.
Unfortunately, I see it used more as a threat. As always,
the most productive tactic will be to ask puppy to do the
behaviours that you actually do want, instead of trying
an ambiguous concept, such as leave. Imagine if I burst
into your house now and said ‘Leave!’ - it could mean
a million different things, and we’re the same species
speaking the same language! As I said earlier in this book,
‘leave’ doesn’t past the Dead Dog Test, namely, if a dead
dog can do it, it’s not a behaviour! (see page 93)


                  SCENARIO ONE
Imagine going into a room that has a teacher in it and
100 chairs laid out. The chairs are numbered 1 to 100.
The teacher doesn’t want you to sit in any of the chairs
numbered 1 to 99. Each time you go to sit, the teacher
says ‘No!’, “Wrong!’, ‘Leave it!’, ‘Off!’, ‘Incorrect!’, etc.
   Here’s the potential fallout:
 ie Youll be very confused.
 ie You'll become frustrated.
 a The teacher will become frustrated.

 Xe You'll lose motivation.
 & You'll learn the teacher is nothing but bad news.
216
                      THE TROUBLE WITH ‘LEAVE’ @&
 ® You won’t enjoy being in the room, or with the
   teacher.

 ® Ultimately, if you really want to sit down, you'll
   learn to ignore the teacher. You'll sit down
     and therefore be reinforced (by the comfort
     of sitting) for doing exactly the behaviour the
     teacher doesn’t want you to do!



                 SCENARIO TWO
Imagine going into a room that has a teacher in it and
100 chairs laid out. The chairs are numbered 1 to 100.
The teacher doesn’t want you to sit in any of the chairs
numbered | to 99. So, they ask you to sit in chair number
100. When you sit in chair number 100, they give you a
bar of your favourite chocolate. Get in!
  Here’s the potential consequences:

     You LOVE this teacher!

 % Tomorrow, you'd love the opportunity sit on
   chair number 100 again please and thank you!

  Teacher’s happy.

    You're happy.

 % You haven’t touched chairs 1 to 99.


                                                        217
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SOUEEZY
   We're back to our mutually exclusive behaviours.
It’s far more effective to ask puppy what you do want
them to do, as opposed to using negative interrupters
such as, ‘Leave it’ or ‘No!’, which never actually tell
puppy what you do want. At best, ‘Leave it’ or ‘No!’
will leave them in limbo; at worst it will damage your
relationship.
   When I visit clients, Pll often draw a line straight
down the middle of a page and I’ll ask them to complete
the column on the left-hand side which I title, “What
You Don’t Want Puppy to Do’.

  The page will look something like this:

 What You Don’t Want Puppy to Do?

 1) Jump up at visitors
 2) Pull me over to other dogs
 3) Pick up rubbish at the park
 4) ‘Steal’ dropped items in
      the kitchen


   Pll then work through the column on the right-hand
side which I'll title ‘What Do You Want Instead?’ I'll be
honest, this is how it normally goes...
   Let’s say the issue is ‘Picking up rubbish at the park’.
I'll say to the client, ‘Cool, what do you want puppy to
do instead?’

218
                                 THE TROUBLE WITH ‘LEAVE’ @&
  They'll invariably reply, ‘I want him to not pick up
rubbish at the park!’
  ‘Not’ isn’t a behaviour!
  We'll chat it through and the client then comes up
with the behaviour they do want in each case.
  The column will now take shape as below:


 What You Don’t Want Puppy to Do? |What Do You Want Instead?

 1) Jump up at visitors               Sit to say ‘Hi’
 2) Pull me over to other dogs        Look to me when on-lead
 3) Pick up rubbish at the park       Run to me when | call him
 4) ‘Steal’ dropped items in          Come to me for a nose target
     the kitchen


Now we have a training plan:

 % Teach ‘Sit’ like a rock star!

 % Teach ‘Eye Contact’ or ‘Reflex To Name’ like
   your life depended on it!

 %° Teach a ‘Total Recall’!

 @’ Teach a ‘Nose Target’ not to be sniffed at!


You will come across the odd (very odd) dog trainer or
part-time whisperer down the park who will say, “Ah,
but I taught my dog to “Leave” in class and when I

                                                                     ye
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
dropped the paracetamol on the kitchen floor and said
“Leave!”, my dog did.’ (Note to self: why does everyone
give ‘dropped paracetamol’ as an example of teaching
‘Leave’, like they’re some kind of clumsy Edward
Scissorhands with a banging hangover?)
  My thoughts on this ‘expert advice’ are:

 ‘ I bet how they said ‘Leave’ in class is not how
   they roared ‘LEAVE IT!’ when in the emergency
   situation at home. I’m sure their dog just got
   the fright of their life and froze. Not good
   for the pup’s relationship to you or their
   associations with the kitchen.

 ww When I ask these trainers, ‘What does “Leave”
      mean to your dog’, they'll reply along the lines
      of, ‘Don’t touch this,’ or ‘Don’t do that’. Who’s
      to say the puppy’s this or that is the same as your
      this or that? Too vague.

 tw While we're at it, to ‘Don’t touch’ or ‘Don’t do’
    is not a behaviour, therefore we cannot teach it
    and put it on cue. So there!


So, in an ideal world (and living with a puppy is an ideal
world!), you’re going to practise and reinforce those
mutually exclusive behaviours so you and puppy will
always know exactly what you want them to do.

220
                        THE TROUBLE WITH ‘LEAVE’ @

                  TO THE FRIDGE!
However, sometimes the ‘sit hits the fan’ and you'll need
an emergency ‘get out of jail card’.
  Here it is...
  Let’s say for some reason you’ve not had a chance
yet to perfect puppy’s recall, nose touch or sit. I’m
going to give you an exercise that will snap puppy
out of whatever mischief they're contemplating and
enable you to get them away from potential danger,
such as someone leaving the front door open or puppy
grabbing the remote control for the TV. It’s called, “To
the Fridge’! We need a cue that puppy will react to
instantly, similar to the way you’re teaching “Reflex To
Name’ on page 167.
  This is a fun one to teach!
  Make sure you have a rich supply of the very, VERY
best food for puppy in the fridge: fresh chicken, cheese,
frankfurters. Whatever floats puppy’s boat the most.
Now, sit on your settee in your sitting room with puppy
milling about and relax ... leave it a few minutes then
suddenly shout in a happy and excited voice “TO THE
FRIDGE! and then immediately run to the fridge
(obviously). Trust me, puppy will follow, and when you
arrive there, open the door and excitedly toss the treats
to puppy like a pirate running treasure through their
fingers. ‘We're rich, rich, | tells yar!’

                                                      ek
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
  After 20 seconds of this high-calorie bedlam, stop,
go silent and return to your settee like nothing has
happened.          |
  Puppy will think, I’ve no idea what just went on, but |
like it!
   Leave it another five minutes or so and repeat, “TO
THE FRIDGE!’ again, run to the kitchen with puppy
and have your 30-second Scooby Snack Mardi Gras.
  Do this a few times a day, at different times of the
day and very soon you'll see how puppy drops everything
when they hear the beautiful “To the Fridge!’ siren.
Don’t always do it from the settee. Sometimes announce
the exciting news from upstairs, sometimes from the
garden. We want “To the Fridge’ to equal PARTYYYYY!
and for those words to be the common denominators,
not the settee.
  Once you see evidence of what a lab assistant with
50 pens in their top pocket would call a ‘Positive
Conditioned Emotional Response’ (+CER - namely,
you see puppy excited in anticipation when they hear
the “To The Fridge’ claxon), you’ll then have your
emergency protocol to get puppy out of trouble in
a positive, exciting way, rather than a suppressive,
threatening manner.
  And while I’m at it, ponder on this one... ‘No’ may
well be the most overused word in puppy training, yet it
probably has the least specific meaning to a puppy!

Zee
                         THE. TROUBLE WITH LEAVE   a,

  Something about human nature in there, methinks.

  Simply put, do this:

 *% Control and manage the environment so errors
     don’t occur.

 % Reinforce heavily the behaviours you do want.

 ww Take ‘Leave’ and ‘No’ out of your puppy
     training vocabulary.


                     SAFE SWAPS
Going all out for the win!
  You’re not gonna believe this but sometimes, just
sometimes, puppy may pick something up in their mouth
that you’re not going to want them to have! You’ve just
read in “The Trouble With Leave’ that we always want
to ask for the behaviours we ‘do’ want puppy to do, as
opposed to trying to ask for the absence of a behaviour
that we don’t.
  Here I’m going to introduce you to the power of the
‘Out!’ command and, as with all training, it’s a great
opportunity for us to keep in the front and centre
in our mind, What does the word mean ... not to us, but
to Puppy?
  To your puppy, when they hear you say ‘Out!’ |
want them to have a super-happy reflex-like emotional

                                                    223
Wf easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
response that tells them, Yahoo! Something amazing is
coming from Monkey NOW!
  No matter what they’re holding, their impulse needs
to be to spit it out of their mouth, in anticipation of
something even better. Sounds good?
  Let’s get to it then:

  1. Start by sitting with puppy in a nice quiet room
       with minimal distractions. After a few minutes
       break the silence by saying ‘Out!’, count half
       a second then place a fab treat on the floor for
       pup. The half-second beat between the word
       and the delivery of the treat will help puppy
       register what ‘Out’ predicts.

      . Stay silent for a few seconds and repeat
        randomly, sometimes with a five-second interval
        between repetitions, sometimes one second,
        sometimes ten seconds. N.B. the reason we start
        with no articles in puppy’s mouth is because
       we want to create a super-positive emotional
       response to hearing the phrase ‘Out!’ I don’t
       want ‘Out!’ to mean, ‘I’m going to take that
       away from you’ (Boo Hiss!); rather, I want
       ‘Out!’ to mean, ‘You’re gonna get something
       AWESOME!’ Once that emotional response is
       keyed in, the rest will fall into place. It’s therefore
       very important to condition a value to the word
224
                  THE TROUBLE WITH ‘LEAVE’ @&
 first, before ever expecting puppy to understand
 what you want them to do when they hear it.
 If, on the first session, puppy has a toy in their
 mouth and we keep saying, ‘Out’ before we’ve
 even taught puppy what it means, then we’re
 going to get into conflict with our puppy, cause
 confusion and poison the cue from day one. For -
 us to give a cue and expect a decent response
 before we've even taught puppy what that the
 cue means is crazy. It’s like you shouting at me,
 ‘SPEAK GREEK! SPEAK GREEK" I'd be like,
 ‘Tell me a Greek word first, teach me what it
 means, then ask me to speak it. Weirdo.’

. Do the above for a few short three-minute
  sessions throughout the day, then for your
  next session put yourself in the same spot
  with puppy and introduce a nice boring item,
  such as a piece of hosepipe or a small block
  of wood. Kneel on the floor with both hands
  behind your back, one holding the boring
  article and one holding the treat. Bring the
  article around to the front and as soon as
  puppy shows any interest, even just to look
 at the item, simply say ‘Out!’ and bring the
 exciting treat around front and place on the
 floor for puppy. While puppy is eating the

                                                      225
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SOQUEEZY
      treat, place the article back behind your back
      ready for the next repetition.

  4. Next step is to make the ‘boring’ item
     marginally less boring by adding slight
     movement to it as you present it to puppy to
     investigate; allow puppy to investigate slightly
     longer, maybe even letting them gently place
     their mouth on it, but as soon as they do
     you say ‘Out!’, hold the article still and then
     produce the treat as before.

Over time, gradually introduce more and more inter
esting articles into the training programme. Perhaps
upgrade the hosepipe to a knotted tea towel. Increase
the intensity, movement and duration of the game with
puppy and, as always, make sure you freeze and hold the
article stationary, before saying ‘Out’.
  When you and puppy have become ‘Out Masters’, you
can then introduce the ‘Out!’ into your play sessions
(see page 143 on ‘Play’), which will help you develop
further games such as fetch.
   Funk it up by having two identical tuggy toys behind
your back, introduce one out front and let the play begin;
when you both have hold of the toy, suddenly freeze, say
‘Out!’ then immediately introduce the second toy in an
animated way for puppy to latch on to.

226
                       THE TROUBLE WITH ‘LEAVE’ @
  Luckily the ‘grass is always greener on the other side’ for
puppies and they really subscribe to ‘the-active-bird-not-in-
the-mouth is better than the dormant-bird-inthe-mouth’,
so it’s really important that the toy you want puppy to
let go of must always become boring before you give the
cue ‘Out!’ Make it boring by stopping all movement and
tension. That way puppy will always spit out the ‘dormant
bird’ in anticipation of the ‘active bird’.
   In my experience, this is by far the best way to teach
puppy to let go of something in their mouth. I’ve used it
with thousands of dogs and it was also my go-to training
method for teaching security dogs to let go of bad guys.
Believe me, these dogs really wanted to hold on to what
was clenched between their teeth (and so did the bad
guys!); if it worked for them, it'll work for you!
  So, there you have it, THE best way to get puppy to
drop an item.
  If, however, you’ve not had a chance to teach ‘Out’
properly yet or you get caught unawares one day when
puppy appears around the corner doing an impression
of Jack Sparrow with a cutlass between his teeth,
remember, you've always got your emergency “TO THE
FRIDGE!’ to call upon.

        G



                                                         220
                                                       ae corset
                                                                                      a
                                                   o         Veta ees            Dees)=
                  |       vile                  eee         hniionitliedlaas oe nares
°                ai                                Lineker            eek savor av ebusaiiees
                                                                                                     a

                          ie             ela                  Aba      ieahaliaa ellen ae Gi
.            ah                    adel   ema iny nh nyse sisson7 hy OB
 |                             et ws sarugegena ye getter rep A) urs
eel.        of           sas              tat      Sregady tity grajurepgwt: , ner -
:                              cw                  Sill iPad uch ee aimee         f% .
,.                                  a7             nd P00 Spelt autihenien |
:                          Achshs telehaiaidaaitantae                                            7quy-
                       ~vtaies           ey Gan el Le coalition Ro
                                                                es oh;ty aloerameaseaeld sh
                                                                                         ns
                 rua   her) too et                     2 mab yin ‘onsen nt be
.          (ior wean                            hades Lemaaricas sete ads wan
            deactivated tude                               Preaaierebal:      ord eae i
                                                                                      tialy

                                                                                           s
                                                                                      J

            ‘Tie yas            ‘tpn              itiney Dx eigenen                       hg :


            <eryenny ng Caener tay                                     sabes Spee
       ;                 nS pirated, ise                           sie Gate
           | tae Rein mt gnt ttynals
             ‘ail re sakes bromine! aly
            eovatantstehivis seit                            eae
            og            ogee                         i
            SP 2                         onan
                    SreaPtsE          Rats

          THE RUCKSACK
              WALK
             (OR ‘WHY DOGS DON’T
                 RUN IN PERU’)


@)* of the many           great things | get to do in my
         job as a dog behaviour lecturer is travel. As well
as lecturing, | also travel on fact-finding    missions to
ensure    my teaching is ‘on-point’. | go to South Africa
to consult at a Pitbull sanctuary in Johannesburg, visit
Bahrain to develop detection dog training and, on a
recent teaching trip to Australia, was lucky enough to
explore the world of herding dogs in Perth.
  However, it’s deepest, darkest Peru that I want to speak
to you about now...
  In modern dog training, a lot of emphasis is given to
allowing the dog to have a choice: the choice to make
the right decisions or the choice to say ‘No’ if they are
feeling uncomfortable. Basically, the thinking is to never

                                                        229
PY Easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
put the dog under any physical or mental pressure to do
as we desire.
   However, I often wonder, given the choice, what exactly
would a domestic dog choose to do? As soon as we have
a dog in a room with four walls or we pop a lead and
harness onto the dog, surely a lot of their natural options
of choice are limited?
  That’s where Peru comes in!
   I had heard of the street dogs in Cuzco, Peru.
  Now, these dogs are ‘owned’, but not in the usual
Westernised way. Basically, from 6am each day, the dogs
are turned out from the home by their owners and they
hook up with their other doggie buddies and spend
the day getting up to exactly what they choose to do. At
10-1lpm, you see them all return to their respective
doorways, the doors open, the dogs get their B&B and
tomorrow the adventure continues.
   On one particular trip, after I landed at Cuzco airport,
the taxi driver (who was wearing two hats, I didn’t
question), asked me what I did for a living. Once he
knew I was a dog trainer he said, ‘You'll love the city
centre, mi amigo, all of the dogs stop and wait for the
traffic lights to go red before crossing the road.’
   Sure they do. I’ve just come down in an airplane,
mate, not the last shower.
  Fast-forward 30 minutes and there we are, pulling up
to the traffic lights in heavy traffic. To our left are about

230
                               THE RUCKSACK WALK
a dozen dogs of all shapes and sizes waiting patiently
for the red light to beep beep beep, signalling that it’s safe
to cross!
  The signal changes and over they cross, no rush, like a
cartoon canine parade. Super-cool.
  A perfect combination of how animals learn and
natural selection right there. And I hadn’t even unpacked
my bags!
  So that was me for the next wonderful two weeks:
video camera in hand, I’d follow hundreds of these
dogs, sometimes solitary, sometimes in loosely formed
social groups to see exactly what they got up to. Here’s
some things they didn’t get up to:

 “ They rarely ran. No rush, time was always on
   their side. They showed no signs of panic to
   desperately get to any particular location.

 ‘” They rarely barked. No real elements of arousal
     or conflict.

 ww They never chased birds, paper bags or tennis
     balls!

In the middle of Cuzco is Plaza De Armas, a large
pedestrian area surrounded by public gardens and
fountains marking the colonial centre of the city. On
one particularly nice day (and they’re all nice days in
the high altitude of Cuzco, as long as you’ve got lungs

                                                          231
re     EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

the size of a squirrel’s purse), up to 500 people can be
seen mooching around the square, having a coffee or
just sitting on the grass enjoying the view (or gasping
for breath!). In addition to the 500 or so people, you'll
see 150-200 dogs also mooching around, sunbathing or
just generally hanging out. Doing exactly as they choose.
   So, given the choice, what did the dogs of Cuzco
choose to do:
 “
      Touch: they liked to ‘be’ with people. I
      photographed a young couple sat by a
      foundation; a large mixed-breed was laid
      alongside them. Not fussing them, just lying
      there, with his flank touching the leg of one of
      the unknown strangers.

      Smell: they liked to investigate any new smell.
      Discarded boxes, bins, even a mislaid child’s
      teddy bear were all subjected to a good old
      olfactory once-over.

      Be curious: given the opportunity, novel items
      such as handbags were all scanned with the
      intensity of a newly promoted customs official.

      Eat: of course! Any free pickings were gratefully
      received.

      Watch: just be still, relax and watch the world go by.


aoe
                               THE RUCKSACK WALK a
These dogs were happy, relaxed and fulfilled. This got me
to thinking: How can I deliver similar to the dogs ‘back home’?
  So far, a lot of what I’ve written in this book is basically
how to ‘get’ your puppy to do a, b and c or how to ‘stop’
them doing x, y and z.
  I don’t want all of your time with puppy to be purely
contingent on behaviours or focused on control and:
management. Those factors are great when it comes to
getting the behaviour we want or to keep puppy safe and
out of trouble, but surely there’s more to life than that,
eh? This is where the Rucksack Walk comes in.
  The Rucksack Walk is something I developed years
ago for dogs and people of all ages, as a way to enjoy
spending time together in a pressure-free, performance-
free and safe way. If you have dog that likes hanging out
with you, 90% of your problems are gone.
   In all honesty, the Rucksack Walk was born out of
necessity. My work is not only with fresh-faced, excitable
puppies but with geriatric dogs, nervous dogs, injured
dogs, rescue dogs, dogs in rescue kennels, dogs that
‘work’ for a living, dogs on restricted exercise, dogs that
need space, dogs that don’t cope well with strangers,
or dogs that have been labelled ‘reactive’, ‘aggressive’
or ‘shy’. I also deal with owners that have limited time,
limited locations and/or limited mobility. I deal with
operational dog handlers who have come off a 10-hour
stressful shift with their security or detection dog. When

                                                           233
       EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

do dogs and people get time to decompress? Walking
your puppy is not about clocking up miles, it really ain’t.
  As a result of seeing so many dogs that needed
exploratory and bonding opportunities and so many
owners that were pushed for time, I decided to come
up with an activity that didn’t demand a high level of
training but ticked similar boxes to those being enjoyed
by the super-satisfied dogs of Peru. An activity that
invested in the dog/owner relationship and gave the
dog the mental ‘release’ they so desire for a fulfilled life.
Notice I refer to mental release as opposed to the more
commonly used mental stimulation. Stimulation implies
excitement, arousal and raising the levels of nervous
activity in the body. I see a lot of pups that suffer because
they’re conditioned to approach everything they see in
the outside world with such a high level of arousal. That
arousal can then get puppy and you into trouble, as they
feel the need to hit everything at 1OOmph, not waiting
to think, reason or weigh up the options before rushing
in - often leaving you behind!
   I’m all for games and fun with puppy. It’s one of my
great pleasures in life. But not always. A good friend
should be someone you’re happy just to be ‘with’.
  That being said, I want you to be able to give puppy a
ton of what they need: recall, loose lead walking, focus,
adventure, exploration, olfactory satisfaction, food('),
novelty and a nice fat dose of serotonin (the ‘feel good’

234
                             THE RUCKSACK WALK             q
neurotransmitter) and oxytocin (the bonding or ‘love’
hormone), without the presence of an adrenalin rush.
  ‘It can’t be done,’ you cry.
  Don’t cry.
  Read on.


         THE RUCKSACK WALE:
       THE TOOLS YOU WILL NEED
For your rucksack walk you'll need:

    A rucksack (funnily enough!)

 w A long line (five metres or so)

 ’ A comfortable puppy harness

 @ Fully loaded treat pouch

 ‘ A puppy chew

 a A ‘thing’ (anything here will do, as long as it’s
   safe for puppy to investigate, e.g. a hairbrush, a
    book, a comb, a shoe ... all will be revealed!)

 a’ A Tupperware box, containing a novel scent
    (again, anything here as long as it’s safe for puppy
    to sniff, e.g. a teabag, a used sock, catnip, etc)

    Another Tupperware box, containing a novel
    food (grab something safe from the fridge that
    puppy has never had before)
                                                        235
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
 ” Fifteen minutes. If you can’t grab 15 minutes
   well ... you can!


  THE RUCKSACK WALK: THE RULES
I originally didn’t want any rules in the Rucksack Walk
as by definition I wanted it to be as relaxed as possible;
however, therein anarchy lies! With that in mind:

  Rule No. 1: Do not see this SOLELY as a
     ‘training’ exercise - SEE IT AS A BONDING
     @PPORTUNITTY.
  Rule No. 2: Every word is a whisper.
  Rule No. 3: Treat everything that comes from the
     rucksack as if it were a baby bird.

So here goes, your first Rucksack Walk with puppy. ‘citing!
  Drive to your location with puppy, ideally somewhere
quiet and reasonably close. Put on your treat pouch and
attach the long line to puppy’s harness. Unload puppy
from your car and make sure all of your interactions are
relaxed and quiet. We’re using the long line here for
safety and we’re keeping everything relaxed and quiet
to minimise arousal. It’s going to take a few repetitions
before you and puppy get into the groove of moving slowly
outside but once you do, it’s a real lightbulb moment.
  I see so many owners walk their dogs in a real, ‘Ready,

236
                              THE RUCKSACK WALK (a
steady, kick the front door down and GO GO GO!’
then speed around the block with puppy because they’ve
got to be back in a certain amount of time and need to
cover a certain amount of distance ... etc.
  No!
  Those kind of walks become so high-octane that
puppy is conditioned to grab at as much information as
possible before the walk comes to an abrupt halt. That’s
when we see the urgent pulling to get to all the sniffs,
the desperate attempts to gather as much information
as possible before the shutters come down as quick as
they went up.
  That’s no fun.
  That’s stressful.
  Imagine you're at a restaurant with a colleague, say one
of those swanky sushi places where the food slowly rotates
around the tables on a conveyor belt as you chat. Now,
imagine you're famished, but the conveyor belt is going
around far too fast. You’re going to desperately grab at
the food as it goes by, you’re not going to fully appreciate
the menu and you're certainly not going engage with your
dinner guest. Any conversation will be wasted.
  A ‘quick march’ around the block with puppy is the
equivalent of the speeding sushi conveyor belt.
  Don’t do it.
  Slow it down.
  Remember the dogs of Peru.

                                                        237
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
                          Step 1
‘Mooch’ to your spot. What I mean by ‘mooch’ is to
stroll, to wander slowly and relaxed to an area maybe
five minutes away. No urgency. Compromise with
puppy; if they want to walk over to an area to sniff
or wee, great. As long as the long line remains slack,
go with them. It’s important they get to investigate
the environment. If the long line goes tight or puppy
begins to run, you just slow to a stop. We don’t want
to allow urgency or tension to sneak into our Rucksack
Walk. When the lead goes back to being slack, continue
your mooch.
   Here’s some sneaky training for the control freaks
out there!
   If, as you mooch, puppy glances towards you, say
‘Good’ and slowly throw a treat out to the opposite side
of you that puppy is on. I’ve just written that myself and
even I don’t get it so I'll try again...
   Imagine puppy is off to your left having a sniff, they’re
three metres away, the long line is slack so you patiently
wait. If they happen to look to you, say ‘Good’, to mark
the behaviour, and toss a treat out to your right. Puppy
will then run ‘through’ you to get the treat.
   The beauty of this method is:

 ’* You're ‘capturing’ the checking in by reinforcing
    it with the treat.

238
                             THE RUCKSACK WALK @&
 @ As a by-product, puppy is also feeling good
   about doing a recall to you on their way to
   the treat.

 * You're not ‘competing’ with the environment,
   because they’re getting the treat and a new area
   to explore on the other side of you.

Three for the price of one!
   If puppy doesn’t check in with you, don’t sweat it. It’s
just information for you that they need to investigate
the location further. Tomorrow’s another day, the more
comfortable they become in the environment, the more
they'll permit themselves to be able to check in with you.
Be poised to ‘mark’ and reinforce it with a treat when
they do.

                         Step 2
When you get to your desired location, you’re going
to do a few recall circuits as discussed in our ‘Recall’
chapter (see page 197).
   Here is the only place on your Rucksack Walk that
you're allowed to speak louder than a whisper. Get it
out of your system because it’s all hush-hush after this!
Keep the triangle layout for your recalls nice and small,
with sides shorter than the length of your long line, to
ensure you can maintain contact with puppy at all times
if required.

                                                       239
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
   I want you to stick to circuit recalls, as the triangle will
ensure you're going over the same area time and time
again. This familiarity of terrain will ensure your recalls
are not having to compete with conflicting novel smells
on the ground.
   Once you’re done, sit down and both hit the deck!

                           Step 3
Don’t you just love sitting on the ground outside with
your puppy’ (if you haven’t done it yet, then that’s
another reason why you need the Rucksack Walk in
yout life!). When I teach group classes, I love seeing the
owners smile when I ask them to all relax and sit down
on the grass with their puppies. I’m sure it’s a link back
to our nursery school days when the teacher said on a
Friday afternoon, “You’ve all been so good this week,
we'll have our story outside.’
   OUTSIDE!? Be still my beating heart!
  So, sit down with puppy; you’ve both just had a good
run doing your circuit recalls so you’re ready to take a
breather.
  Now we’re going to introduce our Tupperware Novel
Scent.
  NOT SO FAST!
   Remember, everything that comes out of the rucksack
is a baby bird. Be slow and curious in your movements.
You're the best children’s entertainer hired to pull the

240
                              THE RUCKSACK WALK
best magic tricks out of that rucksack.
  As you ever-so-slowly begin to unzip the bag, whisper
to yourself and puppy, ‘Oh my, what’s this?’
  N.B. this is not any old, “Oh my, what’s this?’
   This is a Marks & Spencer, ‘Oh... My... Wh... What’s ...
This!?’ that takes an edge-of-the-seat 10 seconds to whisper.
   Slowly take the box from the rucksack, shielding it
gently in your hands like the baby bird that it is. I defy
any puppy to not put their nose in and say, ‘Seriously,
mate, what is it?’
   Enjoy and elongate that conversation.
  This is a great opportunity for you to practise your
connection with puppy. We know from Peru that pups
love to be ‘with’ you, they love to investigate scent.
Here’s your opportunity to share. So slowly, delicately
and deliberately open the very slightest edge of the box,
allow puppy to sniff, then close the box once more.
Lift it up. Bring it back down again and allow puppy to
investigate another tiny little bit. You hold the box all
the time. It’s for you and puppy to investigate together.
  A couple of minutes. That’s enough. PUPPY HAS
EXPERIENCED THE SCENT - NO NEED TO GIVE
THEM THE SCENT ITEM - so then slowly close the
box, unzip the rucksack, put the precious treasure back
in and close the rucksack.
  But’s what’s this, Mum’s unzipping the rucksack again,
OMG, OMG, OMG, shut up ... What’s coming next?

                                                         241
WY casy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

                         Step 4
As promised earlier ... it’s the ‘Thing’!
  Again, slow, curious movements from you. It could
be a baby bird, it could be an unexploded bomb, either
way, softly, softly does it and remember: nothing more
than a whisper.
  Let’s say you've pulled a comb from the rucksack.
  Dogs in Peru love to investigate novel items; your
puppy’s the same.
  Initially, keep it shrouded in your hands, then run
your finger slowly over the teeth to make strange rattling
sounds. Maybe hold it to your lips and blow softly, what
noise does that make? Let puppy sniff, feel and slowly
explore the comb, inch by inch before it delicately
(remember the baby bird/unexploded bomb!) gets
placed back into the rucksack.

                         Step 5
Intro the big one.
  Bring out the Novelty Food Box. Now, this is a BIG
deal for puppy, so embrace it. Why just feed it to puppy
in two seconds when your baby bird approach will allow
you both to connect and take pleasure in the ceremony
for two minutes?
  What’s going to have more value?
  What’s going to connect the two of you best?

242
                             THE RUCKSACK WALK 9
  When the food has been eaten, slowly, slowly put
the box back in the rucksack and then produce, with
Svengalilike orchestration from elsewhere in the
rucksack, the Chew.
  By passively touching puppy as they chew, you're giving
puppy's brain the opportunity to release all of those
feel-good chemicals such as serotonin, dopamine and
oxytocin. Combined with the touch, you'll be creating a
real love-in and decreasing stress in both parties!

                         Step 6
When you’re done - and remember there’s no rush -
pop the chew back in the rucksack, pick up your long
line and get ready to mooch back to your car. I want you
to slowly mooch back to your car along the same route as
you came in; that way you're not going to be going over
new, distracting smells.
   This time, as you head back, when puppy checks in
with you say ‘Good!’ but rather than throwing the treat
to your other side, reward puppy next to your leg as you
continue to walk.
   Because you’re going over the same ground and
you've just spent a wonderful 15 minutes in each
other’s company, puppy won't need to urgently explore
and investigate the environment as much as when you
first arrived. By reinforcing next to your leg, guess what:
youre training loose lead walking for free!

                                                       243
WY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
  When you’re back at the car, secure puppy safely in
your vehicle and head off home knowing that you’ve
had a quality experience that has added to your lifelong
relationship with puppy.
  Not bad for 15 minutes.

               Important Considerations
      It’s only 15 minutes.

      Stay off your phone!

      Maybe substitute one of puppy’s ‘normal’ daily
      walks with a Rucksack Walk. After a week, see
      how you both feel. (I’m guessing a little more
      Zen than usual!)

      A Rucksack Walk is great for staying out of the
      way of other dogs!

      Great for small spaces.

      Great for nervous puppies.

      A great way to chill adrenalin-junkie puppies.

      A great way for you to decompress after a
      stressful day.
 a?
      Enjoy!


Back in Peru, I would sit with the dogs as the sun went

244
                             THE RUCKSACK WALK aq
down and ponder on the wonderful opportunities they
get making their own life choices, day in, day out. One of
them, a large female mastiff-type dog, sat still watching a
dandelion floating for a full five minutes and I thought
how lucky she was to be just living in the moment. | then
realised I myself had therefore been watching her for a
full five minutes...
   For any creature in the animal kingdom, us included,
to have such life choices is a real gift.
   With a Rucksack Walk, it’s a gift you’re now able to
give puppy and, in return, receive.




                                                       245
                                                                                         emits tote ee patted: nee
                                                   | Reer Metne adh basen iefede etary er
                                           tity                                erie, Eien                     wt wees ofl evcilievrigks’q
                                        > hi           rere               st       c ) aia
                                                                                   ]
                                                                                                   17 ui a8                a            cts obsillanal


                             Prey                       ean ba a                              eis                  fiverUnger                      sain

                                                                                .      aS          Saha eft lia
                                                        ke                     gyal beenere wits|FLD eRewig nel Os
                                                                               7   tie    F                        y       7   ")        &           a pe
                                                                                                                                  aoe ae
                                                                                                                               7 tc

YS cai bl dane ys ag Hg a0 a)AY, scout
        oe                        Abe                         4908.       'O2513   is: se               as i vu

                                                                                                                                              ait -
                                                                                                                                                ine
:           -           o.                               Ss
    -   |           -                              4                  ane                a4rE, ee             iy         ny     ad ‘ree             pate


                                                                      ‘            ie    a     |   ie       aie        PAGny    an       us   a,   7An       s
                .             4                i
                                                                           ;           ars                                      So            on         _
                                                                           a             ri. i) 6           Qe                          eet He




                                                       ieee                    BING),    CORTE.         |     SN       sete:        _

                                                                                                      —                             ;         a,
                                                                      iene vi                 “if)lease:
                  Gre        Web      S

   PUPPY SCHOOL,
   GROUP CLASSES
  AND VETS, OH MY!
     qaaaaaagaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaaay!
y, Or Nay?
Now you know my backstory, you know how much I
loved dog classes when I was a kid; well, the freaky dog
boy in me is still as passionate today as that kid was back
then. However, I’m also far more aware of the good, the
bad and the ugly of dog training classes, so here’s a few
tips to guide you through the maze.
   What I wanted back then in my puppy classes is what
I want for you and your puppy now. A great puppy class
and trainer can be so beneficial: you and puppy will
get to make new friends, you'll have a professional you
can trust to ‘hold your hand’ throughout all the puppy
development stages and you'll fine tune the training that

                                                       247
WY casy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
you and puppy will need for life. Puppy should also get
to make friends in a controlled and safe environment.
Ultimately, puppy will learn that dogs are cool, people
are cool and you’re super-cool!
  A poor puppy class can be so detrimental. Just because
they say they’re a professional dog trainer, don’t assume
they're a good professional dog trainer. Remember,
Sweeney Todd was a professional barber!
  Ask around, get personal recommendations and if
something doesn’t feel right then move on, it’s a buyer’s
market and it’s too important not to get right. When
you first make contact with the trainer, don’t be afraid
of giving them a grilling! When I teach classes, I love to
know that my owners want the best for their puppies.
If all owners showed such ambition and commanded a
high standard of their trainers from the start, then the
quality of puppy training services would only improve.
   Here’s a list of things your puppy class must offer:

      An experienced, friendly and qualified trainer.
      Look for qualifications with recognised bodies
      such as the Institute of Modern Dog Trainers
      - my organisation puts their trainers through a
      rigorous assessment process to ensure quality.

 ‘@ Sufficient space so all the class can spread out
    and find more room if required. No more than
    six to eight pups per trainer.

248
PUPPY SCHOOL, GROUP CLASSES AND VETS, OH MY!             &,

   @ Lots of opportunity to ask questions about your
     own puppy.

      The opportunity to contact your trainer out of
       class if necessary.

   a Constructive, pressure-free exercises. The trainer
     must let you know the benefit of each exercise
     and technique. If you cannot see the benefit of
       an exercise, you won’t commit to it!

   w A 100% rejection of any harsh, punitive or
       aversive methods.

      An alternative behaviour for you to reinforce in
      place of any unwanted behaviours.

   ® Fun! If you don’t look forward to going to class
     with puppy, find another class. Neurological
     science tells us that you (and puppy) will learn
     much better if you’re having fun.

      Training with only comfortable, cruelty-free
      equipment. No choke chains, slip leads, pinch
       collars - no exceptions.

   ” Learning. You and puppy should learn
     something new every week.

  I’m not one to dwell on the negatives, but dog trainers
  can be an odd bunch (present company excepted, obvs!).

                                                        249
re    EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY

As I said earlier, they can sometimes get wrapped up in
believing they’re the king or queen of the village hall
between 7pm and 8pm on a Thursday night and can slip
into becoming a pseudo-sergeant major complete with a
wolf-print fleece uniform and matching baseball cap.
  As a kid, I witnessed a trainer saying to an owner in
puppy class, ‘How can we expect our pup to listen, when
you can’t even listen yourself!’ Man alive! Even as a kid
I knew that was not how to motivate and encourage an
owner to do their best for puppy in class. If that was the
limit of their teaching skills, what hope was there for the
pups? That evening I decided, I’m going to be a dog trainer
when I grow up.
   In addition to standard puppy classes, you may well
have seen ‘puppy parties’ advertised. Puppy parties are
often hosted at veterinary clinics and are for puppies
that have not yet had their full vaccinations. Again,
puppy parties can be great, or they can suck.
  A puppy party should not be an opportunity for all the
pups to run around offlead bashing into each other
while the vet nurse discusses how to clean your dog’s
ears and brush their teeth. Out of six pups there, three
may be having a wonderful time, two may be hiding
under a chair learning that other dogs are scary, and
one may be learning that the only way to tell a pup to
back off is to snap at them. The risk/benefit of ‘all off
lead’ is just not worth it.

250
PUPPY SCHOOL, GROUP CLASSES AND VETS, OH My! @q
    Offlead interaction, done properly, can be fun and
  beneficial.
    Rather than a free-for-all, it should look more like
  two well-matched pups off-lead at the same time: as the
  two pups interact, the trainer should be commenting
  to everyone on observable body language (which you’re
  now an expert on having read the Body Language
  chapter! #There’sATestAtTheEnd!).
    The trainer should also be encouraging each owner
  to step in on a regular basis to ensure the pup-to-pup
  interaction does not descend into a crescendo of
  arousal. The play should remain friendly and serve as
  an opportunity to create positive memories for all.
    Here’s the coup, find a trainer that teaches you to
  work with puppy, not against them. Find a puppy school
  that sets a tone to enable you to teach puppy exactly the
  way youd love to be taught yourself.




                                                        201
                                                                                                       a

                                                   aod                                9         Temnlanl canton hsdanen,
                                                       pnt:             tae     panlysetages auipge sleet ate
                                            Cie                    oy          duos        seleeeiagh rane eraiPmw
                                        wit) ah
                                                  i]
                                                       &
                                                                   Sey   serial ytd alee auctor                               ot *
                                                                                                                                sat
                                            pds yetid         bane os tonal vA arn ru veri
                                              mee,    lactis ididatiemoenpien tcf,  ny
F                     Siovew                       tan                  situa sbasts        7   pale’ 2A: eurte Pacelwer od
            -_epoequb                                                   waning or lenge: ‘iychaat apmiow ;
    >             ec Barer                                                ede              veyed ae              mab lcptkanend =
-                 eonberis                                     har       yee        Cldsveds     bias coma

WD"                         ah She                                            aE?         Be ies O1PST? nioongtef oa
7 INE                                                      aS                 ARS               rb                            —
i°                Somaelpas seers ita bindsean                                              caer           pha jy        : bw
a " @etperhavar tent ahin aniigsidaomdr wre
                                         me
eee           ee            ee     :
     5 eee                                                     Tienes gee                       = pace
        4         ay 60 need 4 07%} vipat yare lw                                                  a        LT
q?


raps                                              apna aanediyitaral, Laat:
i                 pegs ih                                           toy) pele Aiitoniat t
Sale eed, ier pela vedi
              : a           fey! iiY ae                                 ciat    w

al                                                                                    (oT
ae                                           wi ngaan
bed, apteel cartier TighRijekeg es 4
—
2;                ;         . =               ;                ‘
        ee                          2
        Teh:          =             .                      a
            ~il                         i                  <a
=                 a:                          vue _
                           Tt                              '
     in               0°    an
                       J        —
       GOODBYE, AND
        GOOD LUCK


    o, | guess this is where we go our separate ways.
        You're going to have so much fun and develop
lifelong memories for each other. It’s exciting times and
I’ve got to be honest, I’m a little envious! Take care of
puppy and remember there’s no such thing as a ‘bad’
training session, merely information    on how to plan
and deliver your next one. Set yourselves up for success,
aim for achievable criteria, and spend your living hours
looking for the puppy behaviours you want more of,
then reinforce them like the dog training Ninja you’ve
now become!


Training a puppy is a process, not an event.



                                                     293
      s   EASY FEASY PUPPY sOUrEZY

  Build an optimistic puppy and enjoy your journey.

  Good luck.




               Sy


  Steve Mann




254
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS




....Oh hello!


Still here?


I didn’t think anyone ever read the acknowledgements
yet here you are, sat watching the credits role while
everyone else turns on their phone and dusts popcorn
off their laps...

Well, let my very first thanks go to you, Dear Reader.
Thanks for taking the time to read my book, I really
hope you enjoyed it.




                                                   295
rf EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
Huge thanks to my wife Gina for constantly fanning the
flames of my passion for dogs and for never insisting
I ever get a ‘real’ job. To our son Luke, who has an
empathy for animals that is second to none. So proud.

You're still here? Righto...

Team IMDT, your work to develop education and
support for dog trainers and behaviourists worldwide
is phenomenal, and a special mention needs to go to
Alison Martin, a golden cog in the IMDT machine.

To Martin Roach, who emailed me after seeing me
on the Lorraine show and suggested I write a book -
obviously address all complaints to him! Thanks, Mart,
for holding my hand throughout the whole writing
process, it’s been an honour working with someone
who has the same taste as me in music and fashion, and
the same forced taste as me in hairstyles...

Thanks to Blink Publishing, particularly Beth and Matt,
for making Easy Peasy Puppy Squeezy actually happen. As
a kid I would ravenously read dog training books from
cover to cover and fantasise about how cool it would be
to actually write one! I’ll be honest, it’s pretty cool!



296
Now, I know you don’t even know my family, but if
you're still game...

Mum and Dad, thank you for teaching me to do lots
of what I love. I’m still getting away with it. Hurrah!
To Anthony and Maria, my brother and sister, thank
you for being such good kids when we were growing up,
which in turn gave me plenty of elbow room to sneak
away to play with dogs!

Finally...

Thank you to all of our dogs, past, present and future,
without whom this book could never have been written,
and to Pablo my staffie, without whom         this book
would’ve been written at least 6 months earlier!




             oe




                                                    297
                                                                                                                                             ra      _      gUo) 2



                                                                              |                                      :               .           ;                7   fos
                                                          oo                                 7:   S224                   av              ob          uiinadiba

                                                                                                                                                          ai He
                                                                                                      ia;            aay      welt          ‘j              “yt        Sas~~

                                              Ath                                             eae?                       T S CONTE        Srimrite“a                     sani
                                                                                                                                                                  Aycyereass

                            jeeniii’                          st                       coi             ened atts                         Vis aT            gel 1 yarn
                         a                             her                                        egals-rack :a Pari                                     ins wees      tedp. iat
                                                      “rea                “sow                    Sw GO uvvabed                           Loi        4     g sitio 4      sine”

                                                                  Dery? \ie                             Pes               WA             voncd            eibriea)een ehieker
                                                                                                                                         be saleder wines
                                                          erie,                   Ae                        oe                           iA          7 neta           to pace. °a
                                ila                                       ;                      2k                  og        tn Agen                    : mi) ee       on be
                                                                                                                                                                         ay    t
                                                                                                                                                                            i i
                FoBtitchoe Sewchst ‘aban ee ia pide tae cog aldiinek
                Seeger seed avsdrersa til wossleutlis Sinciasbea eae
                    thineel vebsty 2 Tiree, viheamedpar coty Teka! ipent cs                                                                                              —
                he                    }» «deetise                                                bends ce pane lim ethene
_               ote                                                               ca
                                                                                   ee                                    7    Td         ahuktnle |wie
                                                                                                                                                     ae

            wet                                       nie —_                                      aa                 + (im)               CR             aoe
                         fut teeja 6: pr
                                       ae Pi ite ts                                                                      ware            baler.              :
                                      ;                           ;                                              i                         Bog               a

                                                                                             .         &~                                        — A, Ay

ev                   enae ie Bint! ‘Pal Aine panrricaiay a oon)




bone
            or Ce ye fondsPeayxyPopes PaLhe
                                      =
                    i)    ‘\d                         Petal eer:
                                                               ace
                aint > cee ed                                                                                                        pa
                     —                        i                                   i=




-
            e
            _            ‘bepebeb         Cad.)pint
                                          ey                      im’ :
     —               T           _                ed




4
     Pity

:7          a>
                a                             = ~~
     ,
                           ares           :
                                Pr            a                       _

                es                            wri
                7                                 1   4
                            INDEX


alternative behaviour 46                 bedroom 42-3
American Kennel Club 51                  bedtime routine 31, 42
Angus (dog) 182-3                        behaviour machine 45
Animal Behaviour and Husbandry           behavioural science 1, 11, 18
  | eG                                   Big Dave (dog) 162-6
animal welfare 33                        biodegradable bags 35
anthropomorphism 73                      biting 97, 98-100
anti-dogtrainer method 193-5             bladder control 52
antler horns 32                          Blessed, Brian 171-2, 173-4
ants-in-theirpants 160                   blinking 70, 123
appropriate action 99                    body language 7, 47, 54, 61, 66,
arousal, learning inhibited by 99          74-6
artificial additives and preservatives      common signals 68
  33, 34-5                                  raised hackles 76
Ash (dog) 2                                 rocking horse 77
association 30, 36, 161-2                   rules of reading 67-8
automatic sit 89-90                         stress 79
                                         body-slamming 119
backing away 71                          Bolster, Geert De 38
Bailey (dog) 206-7                       bonding 147, 236
basic sit 82                             bowls 26, 30, 31
bat-ears 72                              bull’s pizzles 32
beach dogs 75

                                                                            209
FY easy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
cables 40, 102                        control and management 22-4
call to action 79                     Control of Dogs Order (1992) 37
Canine Holy Grail 134                 counter-conditioning 127-8
captured behaviour 204                crescent approach 75
Carlos Fandangos of the West (dog)    crossbreeds 2, 9
 2, 43-4                              crouched back 123
carpets 102                           Crufts 20
case studies 61-3, 91-5, 108-10,      cues 83, 86-7, 177, 215-16
 162-6, 168, 171-4, 182-3, 196,
 206-7, 213-14                        Darwin, Charles 80
cats 47, 85                           Dead Dog Test 93, 216
chemicals 40                          den training 27
chewing 16-17, 31, 33, 39, 40, 97,    Den Wizard 30, 103
  100-3, 105                          dens 25, 27-30, 31, 41-2, 54, 55,
chewing remedy 102-3                    59
chews 26, 30, 32, 39, 40, 102, 103,   dependence 97
  109-10                              desensitisation 122-4
child-gates 54                        designated watchers 54
children 143-4, 213-14                detection dogs 11
choke hazards 40                      diary-keeping 58
Chump (dog) 172                       Diesel (dog) 91-5
circling 55                           dilated pupils 69
Clary, Julian 171                     displacement 77-8, 79
cleaning up 26, 35-6, 54, 58          distance 83, 84, 86-7, 192
closed mouth 71, 79                   distraction 83, 84, 85-6, 192-3
Colin (dog) 168-71                    diversion techniques 31-2
collar 26, 36-7                       diverting eyes 69
comfort blanket 25, 26-7, 30, 31,     dog tag 26, 37
 41, 42-3                             Dougal (dog) 172, 173, 174
comfortable harness 26, 37-8          ‘download’ time 47
commands v. cues 83                   Drunk Dog Walking 188-9
common sense 22, 24, 33               duration 83, 84-5, 192
common signals 68
conditioning 107                      ears 72-3, 79
conducive environment 54, 55          Einstein, Albert 143
confidence building 60                electricity cables 40
conflict 47                           emergency recall 205-6
consistency 47                        environment exposure table 116
constant stare 69                     environmental considerations 35,
context, understanding 67, 77          177

260
                                                              INDEX
enzymatic cleaner 26, 35-6, 54, 58      harness 26, 37-8, 121, 132, 168,
erect ears 73                             185, 187, 188, 190, 199; 230, 235,
erect tail 72                             236
‘escape’ routes 120-1                   head tilt 73-4
etiquette 131-42                        helicopter tail 72
evidence-based learning 15              ‘Hi’, teaching dogs how to say 17
excitement 16, 17, 52, 53               hiding away 124
exploration 31, 102, 120-1              home, modifications to 39-40
exposure tables 116, 118                horizontal lip retraction 71
The Expression of the Emotions in Man   hormones 79
  and Animals (Darwin) 80               hot-water bottle 26, 31, 41
eye contact 34, 75, 76, 156, 175-83,    house soiling see toilet training
  186, 186-93 passim, 219               houseplants 39
eyes, how to read 69-70                 How to Punish Your Puppy 20

fear periods 128-30                     inappropriate action 99
feeding 26, 32-3                        indoor toilet training 52, 56, 58
feet 74                                 Institute of Modern Dog Trainers
fencing 40                                11, 248
‘Fenton’ sensation 196                  interactive feeders 32, 33
fertiliser 40                           interrupter 104-8
fireworks 67                            intimidation 106
first night 41-3                        isolation, avoidance of 42
folded ears 72
frequency 183                           Jarvis (dog) 61-3
‘To the Fridge’ 221-2, 227              Jones, David 52
furrowed brow 123                       jumping up 153-66
fulcrum recalls 203-4
funk it up! 83-7, 182, 195, 200-1,      Kelly, Lorraine 182, 183
  212213; 226                           Kennel Club 51
furniture 40, 44, 46, 102, 103, 106     kit list 25-40, 136-8, 235-6
                                        Kongs 32, 34, 102, 109, 157
gardens 39, 40
glassware 40                            laid-back ears 79
greeting protocol 165                   laws 37
greeting wees 59-60                     lead-pulling 186
                                        leads 26, 38-9, 137, 140, 185-96
hair-standing 76                        licking 17
half-weeing 57                          Lincoln, Abraham 20
Hamilton, Lewis 17-18                   lip licking 123

                                                                            261
re EASY PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
lip retraction 71                     Norton, Graham 206, 207
listening skills 65-6, 80             nose 209-14
littermates 31, 114                   nosiness 39
loose leads 185-96                    Nylabone 32, 102
Lorraine 182
                                      offlead walking 186-7, 250-1
management and control 22             old-school training see traditional
Mann, Gina (wife) 2                    thinking
Mann, Luke (son) 2                    online resources 16, 39
Mann, Steve 254                       orientation reflex 73
  becomes dog trainer 10-11           other dogs 6, 66, 70, 74, 75, 77, 80,
   early life 5-8                      91-4 passim, 131-42 passim, 176,
   experience of 1-2                    178, 183, 186, 218, 219, 230, 244,
   ‘Freaky Dog Boy’ sobriquet 5, 6,     250
     10/12                            outside toilet training 53, 56
   neighbours’ dogs 6, 9              overnight toilet training 59
marking 82
Martin and Kaye (friends) 163, 164    Pablo (dog) 2
‘me’ time 47                          pacing 56
MEB (mutually exclusive behaviour)    pain relief 16, 101
  23, 155-8, 160, 188                 panic, how to avoid 30
mental release 234                    panting 79, 123
meta signals 78                       parks 131-42, 196, 206-7, 218-19
misconceptions 14, 15, 47             patience 54, 179
mobile phones 39                      Pele (dog) 2
mood 106                              perspective 11, 13, 56, 105, 149
morning stretch 68                    piloerection 76
mother dependence 97                  pinned-back ears 73
motivation 15, 46, 114, 179           plastic 109
mouth 70-1, 97-110                    play 143-52
mouth manners 98-100                  play biting 98-100
muscle memory 106-7                   poisonous plants 39
mutually exclusive behaviour see      ponds 40
  MEB                                 Poo and Pee Diary 58
                                      poo bags (see also toilet training) 26,
Nancy (dog) 2                           35, 54, 140
nappy sacks 35                        positive association 30, 34, 36,
natural products 33                     56-7, 62, 63, 122, 124-7
negativity, avoiding 63               positive conditioned emotional
neonatal stage 113                      response (PCER) 36, 128, 222

262
                                                           INDEX ay
positive interrupter 104-8           rucksack walk 136, 229-45
positive reinforcement 23            running 198
primary socialisation 114
proofing 39-40, 85, 88, 180          safe swaps 223-7
pseudo-expertise 14                  science-based dog training I, 11, 14,
pulled-back ears 73                    20, 249
pulling, on lead 186                 sclera 70
punishment:                          Scooby Doo 73
   consequences of 21                Scott, Selina 172
   how to link 18-19                 scratching 56, 69, 78
  mistaken belief in 20, 57, 159-    ‘seasoned’ blanket 41, 42-3
    60, 249                          secondary socialisation 114
   when to apply 16-17               selfgrooming 78
pupil dilation 69                    sensitivity 128
puppy pens 54                        shoes 39, 103
puppy play 144-8                     sights 27, 41, 42, 114, 116, 117, 135
puppy-proofing 39-40, 85, 88, 180    sitting 34, 81-95, 89-90, 112
Puppy’s Personal Bank 99             sitting boss 163
                                     sitting ninja level 87
quality sleep 47                     Skinner, B.F. 18
quickaboutturn 128-9                 sleep 47, 55
                                     smells 27, 41, 42, 114, 116, 117, 118,
raised hackles 76                      120, 126, 232, 240, 243
raised paw 74, 123                   sniffing 17, 54, 55, 75, 78
‘read and respond’ 66                socialisation 47, 111-30
recall 34, 197-207, 221              soft eyes 69
recall circuits 201-3                sounds 27, 28, 41, 42, 69, 114, 116,
reinforced behaviour 34, 53, 82-3,     117,420, 135, 137, 1611915 242
 86                                  speed awareness 18, 21
reinforcement placement 190-1        Spider (dog) 2
relationship building 31             squinty eyes 70
relaxed mouth 70-1                   staring 69
remote controls 39                   stimuli exposure table 118
rescue centres 11                    stress 78-80
resource guarding 10                 stretching 68
restrained recall 199-200            stubbornness, misconceptions of
rocking horse 77                       15, 47
rope toys 32, 102                    submissive urination 52, 60
RTN (reflex to name) 167-74          Summer (dog) 2
rubber toys 32, 109, 110             supervision 54

                                                                       263
WY casy PEASY PUPPY SQUEEZY
survival instinct 10                      The Underdog Show 1, 171
suspicion, how to avoid 46                unwanted behaviour 21
symptom and cause, addressing             urination see half-weeing; greeting
  107-8                                    wees; submissive urination; toilet
                                           training
table cloths 40
tactile textures 32                       V-shaped ears 72
tail between legs 72, 123                 vertical lip retraction 71
tails 40, 71-2                            vets 247
teamwork 46                               vibrissae 71
teeth/teething 31, 32, 98, 101, 107       vinegar 36
telling-off, avoidance of 100             violence, mistaken belief in 20-1
tenseness 71                              vizslas 72
texture 27, 32, 34, 109, 110, 114,        vocalising 123
  H6,.117,. 118; 126
things exposure table 118                 wagging 40, 71-2
Three Ds 83-8, 192-3                      Walcott, Theo 91, 93
tight mouth 71, 79                        walking 53, 185-96
toilet training 16, 17, 25, 33, 35, 36,   water 30, 40
 42, 43, 47, 51, 51-63                    weedkiller 40
   customising 58                         weeing see half-weeing; greeting
   overnight 59                            wees; submissive urination; toilet
   signs to look out for 55-6              training
   timing of 53-4                         wellbeing 80
   and treats 56                          whale eye 70
tongue-flicking 79                        ‘What Hand?’ 151-2
total recaller 197-207                    whining 43, 56, 79
tough love 41                             wide eyes 123
toys 26, 30, 31-2, 39, 102, 105, 109,
  110                                     yawning 68-9, 78
traditional thinking 7-8, 15, 16-17,      Yorkie (dog) 9-10
  ey                                      YouTube 196
transitional stage 97, 113
treats 26, 30, 34-5, 41, 56, 62, 82,      Zebedee-Dog 165
  99, 105, 137                            zombiedoodle 93
triangulation 73
triggers 20
trust 80
tugging 148-51
TWOFOHJOT 191

264
My name’s Steve Mann, and I’ve been a professional dog | KAINER
 and BEHAVIOUKIST for over 3() YEARS. As founder of the Institute of
  Modern Dog Trainers, I’ve helped transform the lives of over
100,000 dogs and their families - and now | want to help you too!

  Whether you're living with a brand-new puppy, an adult dog or rescue
dog, my methods will give you everything you need to know. Using simple,
proven, SCIENCE-BASED and ETHICAL techniques, I'll show you how to have the
     best relationship with your pup, as well as teach you how to get:

              super-fast recalls, great loose lead walking,
                perfect manners and much, much more...

       | promise, it really is EASY PEASY and every TIP, TRICK and LESSON
              will bring you and your puppy closer together.
  @e@ _.                                            .
                        Ill see you on the other side,


                                                   ENJOY!
                                                STEVE MANN




                                                                       os        sess   ve



                                                                       SBN   978-1-78870-160-0




                                                                       9"781788"701

                                                         rE Training               UK £12.99
